Midway upon the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark wood,
for the straight way was lost.
Ah, how hard a thing it is to say what it was,
this savage and harsh and strong wood
that in thought renews the fear!
It is so bitter that death is little more;
but to treat of the good that I found there,
I will tell of the other things I saw within.
I cannot well recount how I entered it,
so full of sleep was I at that point
when I abandoned the true way.
But after I had reached the foot of a hill,
there where that valley ended
which had pierced my heart with fear,
I looked on high and saw its shoulders
already clothed with the rays of the planet
that leads others straight along every path.
Then the fear was somewhat quieted,
which in the lake of my heart had lasted
the night that I passed with so much anguish.
And as one who with labored breath,
having come forth from the sea to the shore,
turns to the perilous water and gazes,
so my soul, which was still fleeing,
turned back to look again upon the pass
which had never yet let a living person leave.
After I had rested my weary body a little,
I took up my way again along the desert slope,
so that the firm foot was always the lower.
And behold, almost at the start of the steep slope,
a leopard, light and very swift,
which was covered with a spotted hide;
and it would not depart from before my face,
rather it so impeded my path,
that I was many times turned to go back.
It was the time of the beginning of the morning,
and the sun was mounting up with those stars
that were with him when the divine love
first moved those beautiful things;
so that to hope well it was for me a cause
of that beast with the gaudy hide
the hour of the time and the sweet season;
but not so that fear was not given me by
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
This one seemed to be coming against me
with its head high and with rabid hunger,
so that it seemed the air trembled from it.
And a she-wolf, that with all longings
seemed laden in her leanness,
and many peoples has already made live wretchedly,
this one placed on me so much gravity
with the fear that issued from its sight,
that I lost the hope of the height.
And as is he who willingly acquires,
and the time comes that makes him lose,
that in all his thoughts he weeps and saddens;
such did the beast without peace make me,
which, coming against me, little by little
drove me back there where the sun is silent.
While I was ruining into a low place,
before my eyes there was offered to me
one who through long silence seemed faint.
When I saw him in the great desert,
"Have mercy on me," I cried to him,
"whatever you may be, or shade or certain man!".
He answered me: "Not man, man I once was,
and my parents were Lombards,
Mantuans by homeland both.
I was born under Julius, though it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of the false and lying gods.
A poet I was, and I sang of that just
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after proud Ilion was burnt.
But you, why do you return to so much grief?
why do you not climb the delightful mountain
that is the beginning and cause of all joy?".
"Now are you that Virgil and that fount
that spills forth so broad a river of speech?",
I answered him with a bashful brow.
"O of the other poets honor and light,
may the long study and the great love avail me
that has made me search your volume.
You are my master and my author,
you are the only one from whom I took
the beautiful style that has brought me honor.
See the beast for which I turned back;
help me from her, famous sage,
for she makes my veins and pulses tremble".
«For you it is fitting to take another journey»,
he answered, when he saw me weeping,
«if you wish to escape from this savage place;
for this beast, for which you cry out,
does not let others pass by her way,
but so impedes him that she kills him;
and has a nature so malicious and evil,
that she never sates her greedy craving,
and after the meal has more hunger than before.
Many are the animals to which she weds,
and there will be more still, until the Greyhound
shall come, who will make her die with grief.
He will not feed on land nor pewter,
but wisdom, love, and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
Of that humble Italy he shall be the salvation
for which died the virgin Camilla,
Euryalus and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
He will hunt her through every town,
until he has sent her back into Hell,
there whence envy first set her loose.
Therefore for your own good I think and I discern
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and draw you from here through an eternal place;
where you shall hear the desperate cries,
see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
each of whom cries out for the second death;
and you will see those who are content
in the fire, because they hope to come,
whenever it may be, to the blessed people.
To whom if you should then wish to ascend,
a soul shall be for that more worthy than I:
with her I will leave you at my departure;
for that emperor who reigns up there,
because I was a rebel to his law,
does not wish that one come into his city through me.
In all parts he rules and there he keeps his seat;
there is his city and his high throne:
oh happy the one whom he elects there!».
And I to him: «Poet, I request of you
by that God whom you did not know,
so that I may flee this evil and worse,
that you lead me there where you just said,
so that I may see the gate of Saint Peter
and those whom you make out to be so sad».
Then he moved, and I kept behind him.
