The day was departing, and the dusky air
was taking the animals that are on earth
from their labors; and I, one alone,
was preparing myself to sustain the war
both of the journey and of the pity,
which the mind that does not err will recount.
O Muses, o high genius, now help me;
o mind that wrote down what I saw,
here your nobility will be shown.
I began: “Poet who guides me,
consider my virtue, if it is able,
before you trust me to the high pass.
You say that the parent of Silvius,
while still corruptible, to the immortal
age went, and was there in his senses.
Therefore, if the adversary of all evil
was courteous to him, considering the high effect
that was to come from him, and the who and the what,
it does not seem unworthy to a man of intellect;
for he was of nourishing Rome and of its empire
in the empyrean heaven chosen as father:
which and who, to speak the truth,
were established for the holy place
where the successor of the greater Peter sits.
Through this journey for which you grant him glory,
he understood things that were the cause
of his victory and of the papal mantle.
Afterwards the Chosen Vessel went there,
to bring back comfort to that faith
which is the beginning of the way of salvation.
But I, why should I go there? or who permits it?
I am not Aeneas, I am not Paul;
neither I nor others believe me worthy of this.
Therefore, if I resign myself to coming,
I fear that the coming may be a folly.
You are wise; you understand better than I can speak.”
And as is one who unwills what he willed
and through new thoughts changes his proposal,
so that from his beginning he wholly withdraws,
such I became on that dark slope,
because, by thinking, I consumed the enterprise
that was in its beginning so resolute.
“If I have understood your words well,”
replied that shade of the magnanimous one,
“your soul is afflicted by cowardice;
which many a time encumbers a man
so that from an honored enterprise it turns him,
like a false seeing startles a beast when it shies.
From this fear, so that you may free yourself,
I will tell you why I came and what I heard
at the first moment that I felt pity for you.
I was among those who are suspended,
and a lady called me, so blessed and beautiful,
that to command me I requested her.
Her eyes were shining more than the star;
and she began to speak to me softly and gently,
with an angelic voice, in her own tongue:
‘O courteous Mantuan soul,
whose fame still endures in the world,
and will endure as long as the world lasts,
my friend, and not of fortune,
on the deserted slope is so impeded
in his path, that he has turned back for fear;
and I fear he may already be so lost,
that I have risen too late to his aid,
from what I have heard of him in heaven.
Now go, and with your ornate speech
and with what is needed for his deliverance,
help him so that I may be consoled by it.
I am Beatrice who makes you go;
I come from the place where I desire to return;
love moved me, which makes me speak.
When I am before my Lord,
I will often praise you to him.’
She fell silent then, and then I began:
‘O lady of virtue, through whom alone
the human species exceeds all contained
within that heaven which has the smallest circles,
so much does your command please me,
that to obey, were it already done, is late for me;
no more is needed than to open your will to me.
But tell me the reason why you do not guard
against descending down here into this center
from the ample place where you burn to return.’
‘Since you wish to know so deeply,
I will tell you briefly,’ she answered me,
‘why I do not fear to come in here.
One ought to fear only those things
that have the power to do others harm;
of the others no, for they are not fearsome.
I am made by God, by His grace, such,
that your misery does not touch me,
nor does the flame of this burning assail me.
A noble lady is in Heaven who takes pity
on this impediment where I send you,
so that she breaks harsh judgment up there.
This one called on Lucia in her request
and said: “Now your faithful one has need
of you, and I commend him to you.”
Lucia, enemy of all that is cruel,
moved, and came to the place where I was,
seated with the ancient Rachel.
She said: “Beatrice, true praise of God,
why do you not succor him who loved you so,
who for you left the vulgar herd?
Do you not hear the piteousness of his lament,
do you not see the death that he battles
on the river over which the sea has no boast?”
In the world there were never people so swift
to do their good or to flee their harm,
as I, after such words were spoken,
came down here from my blessed seat,
trusting in your honest speech,
which honors you and those who have heard it.’
After she had recounted this to me,
she turned her shining eyes, weeping,
which made me come all the more quickly.
And I came to you just as she willed:
from before that beast I delivered you
that took from you the short way up the beautiful mountain.
Therefore: what is it? why, why do you delay,
why do you harbor such cowardice in your heart,
why do you not have daring and boldness,
since three such blessed ladies
care for you in the court of heaven,
and my speech promises you so much good?”
As little flowers by the nocturnal frost
bent down and closed, then when the sun whitens them,
straighten up all open on their stem,
so I became from my weary virtue,
and so much good courage ran to my heart,
that I began like a person confident:
“Oh compassionate she who came to my aid!
and you courteous who obeyed so quickly
the true words that she offered you!
You have with desire so disposed my heart
to the coming with your words,
that I have returned to my first resolve.
Now go, for one single will is of us both:
you leader, you lord, and you master.”
Thus I spoke to him; and after he had moved,
I entered on the high and savage path.
