‘Through me one goes into the sorrowful city,
through me one goes into eternal sorrow,
through me one goes among the lost people.
Justice moved my high maker;
the divine power made me,
the supreme wisdom and the primal love.
Before me there were no created things
if not eternal, and I eternal last.
Abandon all hope, you who enter.’
These words of obscure color
I saw written at the top of a gate;
wherefore I: “Master, their meaning is hard for me.”
And he to me, like a discerning person:
“Here one must leave behind all hesitation;
all cowardice must here be dead.
We have come to the place where I told you
that you will see the sorrowful people
who have lost the good of the intellect.”
And after he placed his hand on mine
with a cheerful face, from which I took comfort,
he led me within to the secret things.
Here sighs, weeping, and loud wails
resounded through the starless air,
so that at the beginning I wept for it.
Diverse tongues, horrible speeches,
words of sorrow, accents of anger,
voices high and hoarse, and with them the sound of hands
made a tumult, which whirls
forever in that timelessly tinted air,
like the sand when a whirlwind blows.
And I, who had my head girt with error,
said: 'Master, what is that which I hear?
and who are these people who seem so vanquished by pain?'
And he to me: 'This miserable state
is kept by the sad souls of those
who lived without infamy and without praise.
Mingled are they with that wicked choir
of the angels who were not rebellious
nor were faithful to God, but were for themselves.
The heavens chase them out, not to be less beautiful,
nor does deep hell receive them,
for the damned would have some glory from them.'
And I: 'Master, what is so grievous
to them that makes them lament so loudly?'
He answered: 'I will tell you very briefly.
These have no hope of death,
and their blind life is so abject,
that they are envious of every other fate.
Fame of them the world does not permit to exist;
mercy and justice scorn them:
let us not speak of them, but look and pass.'
And I, who looked again, saw a banner
which, whirling, ran so fast,
that it seemed to me unworthy of any rest;
and behind it came so long a train
of people, that I would not have believed
that death had undone so many.
After I had recognized some among them,
I saw and knew the shade of him
who made through cowardice the great refusal.
At once I understood and was certain
that this was the sect of the wretches,
displeasing to God and to His enemies.
These unfortunate ones, who never were alive,
were naked and much goaded
by hornets and by wasps that were there.
These streaked their faces with blood,
which, mixed with tears, at their feet
was collected by loathsome worms.
And when I set myself to look beyond,
I saw people on the bank of a great river;
for which I said: “Master, now grant me
that I may know who they are, and what custom
makes them seem so eager to cross over,
as I discern through the dim light.”
And he to me: “These things will be made known to you
when we have stopped our steps
on the sad shore of Acheron.”
Then with my eyes ashamed and lowered,
fearing my words might have been displeasing to him,
I refrained from speech until the river.
And behold, coming toward us in a boat
an old man, white with ancient hair,
shouting: “Woe to you, depraved souls!
Never hope to see the sky:
I come to lead you to the other shore,
into eternal darkness, in heat and in ice.
And you who are there, living soul,
separate yourself from these who are dead.”
But when he saw that I did not depart,
he said: “By another way, by other ports
you will come to the shore, not here, for your passage:
a lighter vessel it behooves to carry you.”
And my leader to him: “Charon, do not be vexed:
it is so willed there where what is willed can be done,
and ask no more.”
At this the woolly cheeks were quieted
of the ferryman of the livid marsh,
who around his eyes had wheels of flame.
But those souls, who were weary and naked,
changed color and chattered their teeth,
as soon as they heard the harsh words.
They blasphemed God and their parents,
the human species and the place and the time and the seed
of their sowing and of their births.
Then they all drew back together,
weeping loudly, to the wicked shore
that awaits every man who does not fear God.
Charon the demon, with eyes of burning coal,
gesturing to them, gathers them all;
he strikes with his oar whichever one lingers.
As in autumn the leaves lift off
one after another, until the branch
sees on the earth all its spoils,
so the evil seed of Adam
cast themselves from that shore one by one,
at his signs like a bird to its call.
Thus they go away over the dark wave,
and before they have disembarked on the other side,
already on this side a new troop gathers.
"My son," said the courteous master,
"those who die in the wrath of God
all convene here from every country;
and they are ready to cross the river,
for divine justice spurs them on,
so that fear is turned into desire.
From here no good soul ever passes;
and therefore, if Charon complains of you,
you can well know now what his speech means."
This being finished, the dark plain
trembled so strongly, that from the terror
the memory still bathes me in sweat.
The tear-soaked earth gave forth a wind,
which flashed a reddish light
that overcame my every sense;
and I fell like a man whom sleep seizes.
