A heavy thunder broke the deep sleep in my head,
so that I started up like a person who is forcibly awakened;
and I moved my rested eye around,
standing straight up, and looked intently
to recognize the place where I was.
True it is that I found myself on the bank
of the dolorous abyssal valley
that gathers the thunder of infinite woes.
Dark and deep it was, and nebulous,
so that, though I fixed my gaze to the bottom,
I could discern nothing there.
"Now let us descend down here into the blind world,"
began the poet, all pale.
"I will be first, and you will be second."
And I, who had noticed his color,
said: "How shall I come, if you are afraid,
you who are wont to be a comfort to my doubting?"
And he to me: "The anguish of the people
who are down here, paints on my face
that pity which you mistake for fear.
Let us go, for the long way urges us on."
Thus he set forth, and thus he made me enter
the first circle that girds the abyss.
Here, as far as one could tell by listening,
there was no lamentation but for sighs
that made the eternal air tremble;
this came from a grief without torments,
which the crowds had, that were many and great,
of infants and of women and of men.
The good master to me: "Do you not ask
what spirits these are that you see?
Now I want you to know, before you go further,
that they did not sin; and if they have merits,
it is not enough, because they did not have baptism,
which is the gate of the faith that you believe;
and if they were before Christianity,
they did not adore God fittingly:
and of such as these I myself am one.
For such defects, and for no other guilt,
we are lost, and only by so much are we afflicted
that without hope we live in desire."
Great grief seized my heart when I heard it,
because people of great worth
I knew were suspended in that limbo.
"Tell me, my master, tell me, lord,"
began I, wanting to be certain
of that faith which conquers every error:
"did anyone ever leave here, either by his own merit
or by another's, who then was blessed?".
And he who understood my veiled speech,
replied: "I was new to this state,
when I saw come here a mighty one,
crowned with the sign of victory.
He drew from here the shade of the first parent,
of Abel his son and that of Noah,
of Moses the lawgiver and obedient;
Abraham the patriarch and David the king,
Israel with his father and with his sons
and with Rachel, for whom he did so much,
and many others, and He made them blessed.
And I want you to know that, before them,
human spirits were not saved."
We did not cease our walking though he spoke,
but passed through the wood nonetheless,
the wood, I say, of crowded spirits.
Our way was not yet long
on this side of my sleep, when I saw a fire
that conquered a hemisphere of darkness.
We were still a little distant from it,
but not so far that I did not discern in part
that honorable people possessed that place.
"O you who honor science and art,
who are these who have so much honor,
that it separates them from the manner of the others?".
And he to me: "The honored renown
which of them sounds up in your life,
gains grace in Heaven which so advances them."
Meanwhile a voice was heard by me:
"Honor the most high poet;
his shade returns, which had departed."
After the voice had rested and was quiet,
I saw four great shades come toward us:
their appearance was neither sad nor happy.
The good master began to say:
“Look at that one with that sword in his hand,
who comes before the three as if their lord:
that is Homer, the sovereign poet;
the other is Horace the satirist who comes;
Ovid is the third, and the last Lucan.
Because each one shares with me
in the name that the single voice sounded,
they do me honor, and in this they do well.”
Thus I saw the beautiful school assemble
of that lord of the highest song
who soars over the others like an eagle.
After they had spoken together for a while,
they turned to me with a gesture of greeting,
and my master smiled at that;
and they did me even far more honor,
for they made me one of their company,
so that I was sixth among so much wisdom.
Thus we went on as far as the light,
speaking of things which it is beautiful to be silent of,
just as it was fitting to speak there where we were.
We came to the foot of a noble castle,
seven times circled by high walls,
defended all around by a fair little river.
This we passed as if it were hard ground;
through seven gates I entered with these sages:
we arrived in a meadow of fresh green.
People were there with slow and grave eyes,
of great authority in their appearance:
they spoke seldom, with gentle voices.
We withdrew thus to one of the sides,
to a place open, luminous, and high,
so that all of them could be seen.
There, straight ahead, upon the green enamel,
were shown to me the great spirits,
for the sight of whom I exalt myself within.
I saw Electra with many companions,
among whom I knew Hector and Aeneas,
Caesar in arms with his falcon-like eyes.
I saw Camilla and Penthesilea;
on the other side I saw King Latinus
who with Lavinia his daughter was seated.
I saw that Brutus who drove out Tarquin,
Lucretia, Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia;
and by himself, apart, I saw Saladin.
When I raised my brows a little higher,
I saw the master of those who know
seated among a philosophic family.
All gaze at him, all do him honor:
there I saw Socrates and Plato,
who before the others stand closer to him;
Democritus who puts the world on chance,
Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales,
Empedocles, Heraclitus, and Zeno;
and I saw the good collector of qualities,
Dioscorides I mean; and I saw Orpheus,
Tully and Linus and moral Seneca;
Euclid the geometer and Ptolemy,
Hippocrates, Avicenna, and Galen,
Averroës, who made the great commentary.
I cannot recount all of them fully,
because the long theme so drives me on,
that many times the telling falls short of the fact.
The company of six diminishes to two:
by another path my wise guide leads me,
out of the quiet, into the air that trembles.
And I come to a place where nothing shines.
