Thus I descended from the first circle
down into the second, which girds less space
and so much more pain, that it stings to a wail.
There stands Minos horribly, and he snarls:
he examines the sins at the entrance;
judges and sends according as he entwines.
I say that when the ill-born soul
comes before him, it confesses all;
and that knower of sins
sees which place of Hell is for it;
he girds himself with his tail as many times
as the degrees he wills it be sent down.
Always before him many of them stand:
they go in turn each to the judgment,
they speak and hear and then are turned down.
"O you who come to the sorrowful hospice,"
said Minos to me when he saw me,
leaving the act of so great an office,
"watch how you enter and in whom you trust;
let not the wideness of the entrance deceive you!"
And my leader to him: "Why do you even cry out?
Do not impede his fated going:
it is so willed there where what is willed can be done,
and ask no more."
Now begin the sorrowful notes
to make themselves heard to me; now I have come
to where much weeping strikes me.
I came into a place mute of all light,
which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,
if by contrary winds it is fought.
The infernal storm, which never rests,
leads the spirits with its violence;
turning and striking, it molests them.
When they arrive before the ruin,
here are the shrieks, the complaint, the lament;
here they blaspheme the divine power.
I understood that to such a torment
are damned the carnal sinners,
who subject reason to desire.
And as their wings carry the starlings
in the cold season, in a wide and full flock,
so that blast leads the evil spirits
here, there, down, up;
no hope ever comforts them,
not of rest, but of lesser pain.
And as the cranes go singing their lays,
making of themselves a long line in the air,
so I saw coming, uttering woes,
shades carried by the aforesaid strife;
wherefore I said: "Master, who are those
people whom the black air so chastises?".
“The first of those of whom tidings
you wish to know,” he said to me then,
“was empress of many tongues.
To the vice of lust she was so broken,
that she made lust lawful in her law,
to take away the blame into which she was led.
She is Semiramis, of whom one reads
that she succeeded Ninus and was his spouse:
she held the land that the Sultan now rules.
The next is she who killed herself for love,
and broke faith with the ashes of Sychaeus;
then is Cleopatra the luxurious.
See Helen, for whom so much wicked
time turned, and see the great Achilles,
who with love at the end contended.
See Paris, Tristan”; and more than a thousand
shades he showed me and named me by pointing,
whom love had parted from our life.
After I had heard my teacher
name the ladies of old and the knights,
pity overcame me, and I was almost lost.
I began: “Poet, willingly
would I speak to those two who go together,
and seem to be so light upon the wind.”
And he to me: “You will see when they are
nearer to us; and you then pray them
by that love which leads them, and they will come.”
As soon as the wind bends them toward us,
I raised my voice: “O wearied souls,
come speak to us, if another does not deny it!”.
As doves, called by desire,
with wings raised and steady to the sweet nest
come through the air, borne by their will;
so did these issue from the flock where Dido is,
coming to us through the malignant air,
so strong was the affectionate cry.
“O gracious and benign creature
who goes visiting through the darkened air
us who stained the world with blood,
if the King of the universe were our friend,
we would pray to him for your peace,
since you have pity for our perverse evil.
Of that which you please to hear and to speak,
we will hear and we will speak to you,
while the wind, as it is now, is silent for us.
The land where I was born sits
on the shore where the Po descends
to have peace with its followers.
Love, which quickly takes hold in a gentle heart,
seized this one for the beautiful person
that was taken from me; and the way still offends me.
Love, which pardons no loved one from loving,
seized me for his beauty so strongly,
that, as you see, it still does not abandon me.
Love led us to one death.
Caina awaits him who took our life.”
These words were brought to us from them.
When I heard those tormented souls,
I bowed my face, and held it so low,
that the poet said to me: “What are you thinking?”
When I replied, I began: “Oh alas,
how many sweet thoughts, how much desire
led them to the sorrowful pass!”
Then I turned back to them and I spoke,
and began: “Francesca, your torments
make me weep, sad and compassionate.
But tell me: in the time of sweet sighs,
by what and how did love grant you
that you should know your dubious desires?”
And she to me: “No greater sorrow
than to remember a happy time
in misery; and this your teacher knows.
But if to know the first root
of our love you have such great desire,
I will tell as one who weeps and tells.
One day, for delight, we were reading
of Lancelot, how love constrained him;
we were alone and without any suspicion.
Several times that reading pushed our eyes together
and made our faces pale;
but it was one point alone that overcame us.
When we read of the desired smile
being kissed by so great a lover,
this one, who will never be divided from me,
kissed my mouth, all trembling.
A Gallehaut was the book and he who wrote it:
that day we read in it no farther.”
While the one spirit said this,
the other wept, so that from pity
I fainted as if I were dying.
And I fell as a dead body falls.
