Upon the return of my mind, which had closed
before the pity of the kindred pair,
which with sadness had wholly confused me,
new torments and new tormented ones
I see around me, however I may move
and I may turn, and however I may gaze.
I am in the third circle, of the rain
eternal, accursed, cold, and heavy;
its rule and quality are never new.
Coarse hail, dark water, and snow
pour down through the tenebrous air;
the earth that receives this putrefies.
Cerberus, a cruel and monstrous beast,
with three throats barks in a dog-like fashion
over the people who here are submerged.
His eyes are crimson, his beard greasy and black,
and his belly large, and his hands are clawed;
he claws the spirits and flays and quarters them.
The rain makes them howl like dogs;
with one of their sides they make a screen for the other;
often the wretched profane ones turn themselves.
When Cerberus, the great worm, perceived us,
he opened his mouths and showed us his fangs;
he had no limb that he held still.
And my leader spread out his hands,
took up earth, and with his fists full
threw it into the craving gullets.
As is that dog that barking craves,
and grows quiet then when it bites the food,
since only to devour it he strains and struggles,
so became those filthy faces
of the demon Cerberus, who so thunders at
the souls, that they would wish to be deaf.
We were passing over the shades that the heavy rain
prostrates, and placed our soles
upon their emptiness which seems a person.
They were all lying on the ground,
except for one who sat up, quickly
as soon as he saw us pass before him.
“O you who are drawn through this Hell,”
he said to me, “recognize me, if you can:
you were made before I was unmade.”
And I to him: “The anguish that you have
perhaps pulls you from my memory,
so that it seems I never saw you.
But tell me who you are that in so sad
a place are put, and have so foul a punishment,
that, if another is greater, none is so displeasing.”
And he to me: “Your city, which is so full
of envy that the sack already overflows,
held me with it in the serene life.
You citizens called me Ciacco:
for the damning sin of gluttony,
as you see, I am weakened by the rain.
And I, sad soul, am not alone,
for all of these for a similar sin
stand in a similar punishment.” And he spoke no more words.
I answered him: “Ciacco, your suffering
so weighs upon me that it invites me to weep;
but tell me, if you know, to what will come
the citizens of the divided city;
if any there are just; and tell me the reason
why such great discord has assailed it.”
And he to me: “After long contention
they will come to blood, and the rustic party
will drive out the other with much offense.
Then it is fitting that this one fall
within three suns, and the other rise up
with the force of one who now is coasting.
For a long time it will hold its brows high,
holding the other under heavy weights,
however much it weeps for this or is shamed.
The just are two, and are not heeded there;
pride, envy, and avarice are
the three sparks that have set their hearts ablaze.”
Here he put an end to the tearful sound.
And I to him: “I still wish you to teach me
and to grant me the gift of more speech.
Farinata and Tegghiaio, who were so worthy,
Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca
and the others who set their wits to doing good,
tell me where they are and let me know them;
for a great desire grips me to know
if Heaven sweetens them or Hell envenoms them.”
And he: “They are among the blackest souls;
different sins weigh them down to the bottom:
if you descend so far, there you will be able to see them.
But when you are in the sweet world,
I pray you to recall me to the minds of others:
more I do not tell you and more I do not answer.”
He twisted his straight eyes then into crooked ones;
he looked at me a little and then bent his head:
he fell with it to the level of the other blind ones.
And the leader said to me: «He awakens no more
on this side of the sound of the angelic trumpet,
when the hostile power shall come:
each one will see his sad tomb again,
will take up again his flesh and his form,
will hear that which resounds eternally».
Thus we passed through the foul mixture
of the shades and of the rain, with slow steps,
touching a little on the future life;
wherefore I said: «Master, these torments
will they increase after the great sentence,
or be less, or will they be as burning?».
And he to me: «Return to your science,
which wills that, the more a thing is perfect,
the more it feels good, and so too suffering.
Although this accursed people
may never go into true perfection,
they expect to be more there than here».
We circled around that road,
speaking much more than I recount;
we came to the point where one descends:
there we found Plutus, the great enemy.
