"Pape Satàn, pape Satàn aleppe!",
began Plutus with his clucking voice;
and that gentle sage, who knew all things,
said to comfort me: "Let not your fear
harm you; for, whatever power he may have,
he will not deny us the descent of this rock."
Then he turned to that swollen face,
and said: "Be silent, accursed wolf!
Consume yourself within with your own rage.
Not without cause is this going to the deep:
it is willed on high, there where Michael
wrought vengeance for the proud rebellion."
As from the wind the swollen sails
fall entangled, when the mast snaps,
so fell to the earth the cruel beast.
Thus we descended into the fourth hollow,
taking more of the sorrowful bank
that sacks up all the evil of the universe.
Ah, justice of God! who crams so many
new travails and pains as I saw?
And why does our guilt so waste us?
As does the wave there over Charybdis,
that breaks itself against the one with which it clashes,
so must the people here perform their round.
Here I saw people more numerous than elsewhere,
and on one side and the other, with great howls,
rolling weights by strength of their chests.
They struck against each other; and then right there
each would turn, rolling backward,
shouting: “Why do you hoard?” and “Why do you squander?”
Thus they returned through the dismal circle
from each side to the opposite point,
shouting again their shameful refrain;
then each one turned, when he had arrived,
through his half-circle to the other joust.
And I, who had my heart almost pierced with pity,
said: “My master, now show me
what people these are, and if all were clerics,
these tonsured ones on our left.”
And he to me: “All of them were so squint-eyed
of mind in the first life,
that they made no expenditure with measure.
Their voice barks this out clearly enough
when they come to the two points of the circle
where a contrary fault divides them.
These were clerics, who have no hairy covering
on their head, and popes and cardinals,
in whom avarice practices its excess.”
And I: “Master, among such as these
I should indeed recognize some
who were befouled by these evils.”
And he to me: “You assemble a vain thought:
the undiscerning life that made them squalid
now makes them dark to all recognition.
Eternally they will come to the two buttings:
these will rise from the sepulcher
with a closed fist, and these with their hair shorn.
Ill-giving and ill-keeping has taken the fair world
from them, and set them to this scuffle:
what it is like, I do not adorn with fair words.
Now you can see, son, the short mockery
of the goods that are committed to Fortune,
for which the human race embroils itself;
for all the gold that is under the moon
and that ever was, of these weary souls
could not give rest to a single one.”
«My Master,» I said, «now also tell me:
this Fortune that you touch on for me,
what is she, who has the world’s goods so in her clutches?».
And he to me: «Oh foolish creatures,
how great is the ignorance that harms you!
Now I want you to receive my judgment.
He whose knowledge transcends all,
made the heavens and gave them their guides
so that every part shines on every part,
distributing the light equally.
Likewise, for worldly splendors
he ordained a general minister and guide
who would, in time, exchange the vain goods
from people to people, and from one bloodline to another,
beyond the defense of human wits;
wherefore one people rules and another languishes,
following her judgment,
which is hidden, like a snake in the grass.
Your knowledge cannot stand against her:
she provides, judges, and pursues
her kingdom, as the other gods do theirs.
Her permutations have no truce:
necessity makes her swift;
so often comes one who gets his turn.
This is she who is so put on the cross
even by those who ought to give her praise,
giving her wrongful blame and an evil name;
but she is blessed and does not hear it:
with the other first creatures, happy,
she turns her sphere and rejoices in her bliss.
Now let us descend to greater suffering;
already every star is falling that was rising
when I set out, and to stay too long is forbidden».
We cut across the circle to the other bank
above a spring that boils and pours forth
through a channel that from it derives.
The water was much darker than perse;
and we, in the company of the murky waves,
entered down by a strange path.
Into the marsh that has the name Styx
this sad stream goes, when it has descended
to the foot of the malignant gray slopes.
And I, who was intent on gazing,
saw muddy people in that swamp,
all naked, with an outraged look.
These struck each other not only with their hands,
but with their heads and chests and with their feet,
tearing themselves to pieces with their teeth.
The good master said: "Son, now you see
the souls of those whom anger overcame;
and also I want you to believe for certain
that under the water there are people who sigh,
and make this water bubble at the surface,
as your eye tells you, wherever it turns.
Stuck in the slime, they say: ‘Sullen were we
in the sweet air that is gladdened by the sun,
carrying inside a sullen smoke:
now we are sullen in the black mire’.
This hymn they gurgle in their throats,
for they cannot say it with unbroken words».
Thus we circled a great arc of the foul marsh,
between the dry bank and the swamp,
with eyes turned to those who gorge on the mud.
We came at last to the foot of a tower.
