I say, continuing, that well before
we were at the foot of the tall tower,
our eyes went upward to the summit
for two small flames we saw placed there,
and another from far away return a sign,
so far the eye could barely take it in.
And I turned to the sea of all wisdom;
I said: “What does this say? And what does
that other fire answer? And who are they who made it?”.
And he to me: “Over the filthy waves
you can already make out what is expected,
if the smoke of the marsh does not hide it from you”.
A bowstring never thrust from itself an arrow
that ran so swiftly through the slender air,
as I saw a little boat
coming through the water toward us in that moment,
under the command of a single boatman,
who was shouting: “Now you have come, felonious soul!”.
“Phlegyas, Phlegyas, you shout in vain,”
said my lord, “this time:
you will have us no longer than for crossing the mire”.
As is he who learns of a great deception
that has been done to him, and then resents it,
so Phlegyas became in his gathered wrath.
My leader descended into the boat,
and then had me enter after him;
and only when I was inside did it seem laden.
As soon as my guide and I were in the vessel,
its ancient prow goes on, cutting
the water more than it is wont to with others.
While we were crossing the dead swamp,
before me one full of mud appeared,
and said: “Who are you that comes before your time?”.
And I to him: “If I come, I do not remain;
but who are you, who have become so ugly?”.
He answered: “You see that I am one who weeps”.
And I to him: “With weeping and with grief,
cursed spirit, you remain;
for I know you, even though you are all filthy”.
Then he stretched both hands toward the boat;
at which the prudent master pushed him off,
saying: “Away there with the other dogs!”.
Then with his arms he clasped my neck;
he kissed my face and said: “Indignant soul,
blessed is she who conceived you!
He was in the world an arrogant person;
there is no goodness that adorns his memory:
thus his shade is furious here.
How many up there now hold themselves great kings
who here will stand like pigs in mire,
leaving of themselves horrible contempt!”.
And I: “Master, I would be very eager
to see him dunked in this slop
before we came out of the lake”.
And he to me: “Before the shore
lets you see it, you will be satisfied:
of such a desire it is fitting that you have joy”.
A little after this I saw such torment
inflicted on him by the muddy people,
that I still praise and thank God for it.
They all were shouting: “At Filippo Argenti!”;
and the bizarre Florentine spirit
turned on himself with his own teeth.
We left him there, of him I say no more;
but on my ears there struck a sound of grief,
so that ahead I strain my eyes wide open.
The good master said: 'Now, my son,
the city named Dis is drawing near,
with its grave citizens, with its great host.'
And I: 'Master, already its mosques
there within the valley I certainly discern,
vermilion as if they had come out of fire
they were.' And he to me: 'The eternal fire
that enflames them within shows them red,
as you see in this lower Hell.'
We finally came within the deep moats
that surround that disconsolate land:
the walls seemed to me to be of iron.
Not without first making a great circuit,
we came to a place where the strong ferryman
'Get out,' he cried: 'here is the entrance.'
I saw more than a thousand upon the gates
rained from heaven, who angrily
said: "Who is this who without death
goes through the kingdom of the dead people?".
And my wise master made a sign
that he wished to speak with them secretly.
Then they checked a little their great disdain
and said: "You come alone, and let him go away
who so boldly entered this kingdom.
Let him return alone by the foolish path:
let him try, if he knows how; for you shall remain here,
who have escorted him through so dark a country."
Think, reader, if I became disheartened
at the sound of the accursed words,
for I did not believe I would ever return.
"O my dear duke, who more than seven
times have rendered me security and drawn me
from high peril that stood against me,
do not leave me," I said, "so undone;
and if the passage farther is denied to us,
let us retrace our steps together swiftly."
And that lord who had led me there,
said to me: "Do not fear; for our passage
no one can take from us: by Such a One it is given.
But wait for me here, and your weary spirit
comfort and feed with good hope,
for I will not leave you in the world below."
Thus he goes, and there he abandons me,
the sweet father, and I remain in doubt,
for yes and no contend in my head.
I could not hear what he proposed to them;
but he did not stay there long with them,
for each one vied to run back inside.
Those our adversaries slammed the gates
in my lord's face, who remained outside
and turned back to me with slow steps.
His eyes to the ground and his brows were shorn
of all confidence, and he said in sighs:
"Who has denied me the houses of sorrow!".
And to me he said: "You, though I am angered,
be not dismayed, for I shall win the trial,
whoever within may circle for the defense.
This their insolence is not new;
for they used it once at a less secret gate,
which without a lock is still to be found.
Over it you saw the dead inscription:
and already on this side of it, descending the steep,
passing through the circles without an escort,
comes one by whom the city shall be opened to us."
