The pallor that cowardice painted on me,
seeing my leader turn back,
he repressed his own new one all the sooner.
He stopped, attentive, like a man who listens,
for his eye could not lead him far
through the black air and the thick fog.
“Still, it must be that we win this battle,”
he began, “if not . . . Such a one offered herself.
Oh how long it seems to me till someone arrives here!”
I saw clearly how he covered up
the beginning with what came after,
which were words different from the first;
but nonetheless his speech gave me fear,
because I drew his broken-off words
perhaps to a worse meaning than they held.
“Into this depth of the sad hollow,
does anyone from the first grade ever descend,
whose only punishment is severed hope?”
This question I asked; and he: “It rarely
happens,” he answered me, “that any of us
makes the journey which I am making.
It is true I was down here another time,
conjured by that cruel Erichtho
who called shades back to their bodies.
My flesh had been bare of me for little time
when she made me enter within that wall,
to draw a spirit from the circle of Judas.
That is the lowest place and the most dark,
and farthest from the Heaven that circles all:
I know the way well; therefore be secure.
This swamp that breathes the great stench
encircles the grieving city,
where we cannot enter now without wrath.”
And he said more, but I have it not in mind;
because my eye had been completely drawn
toward the high tower with the glowing summit,
where in an instant there suddenly stood
three infernal furies stained with blood,
who had feminine limbs and features,
and were girt with greenest hydras;
for hair they had little serpents and horned vipers,
with which their savage temples were bound.
And he, who well knew the handmaidens
of the queen of eternal lament,
“Look,” he said to me, “at the fierce Erinyes.
This is Megaera on the left side;
that one weeping on the right is Alecto;
Tisiphone is in the middle”; and then fell silent.
With her nails each one was clawing her breast;
they beat themselves with their palms and screamed so loud,
that I pressed close to the poet out of fear.
“Let Medusa come: then we’ll turn him to stone,”
they all said, looking downward;
“poorly we avenged the assault of Theseus.”
“Turn your back and keep your face shut;
for if the Gorgon shows herself and you should see her,
there would be no returning ever above.”
Thus said the master; and he himself
turned me, and did not trust my hands,
but with his own he also covered me.
O you who have sound intellects,
behold the doctrine that is hidden
beneath the veil of the strange verses.
And already there came over the turbid waves
a crash of a sound, full of terror,
for which both the shores trembled,
not otherwise made than of a wind,
impetuous from opposing heats,
that strikes the forest and without any restraint
shatters the branches, fells them, and carries them forth;
dusty it goes on before, superb,
and makes the wild beasts and the shepherds flee.
He freed my eyes and said: “Now direct the nerve
of your sight over that ancient foam,
there where that smoke is most harsh.”
As the frogs before the enemy
snake all scatter through the water,
until each one squats upon the land,
I saw more than a thousand destroyed souls
fleeing thus before one who at a walking pace
was crossing Styx with his soles dry.
From his face he was removing that thick air,
waving his left hand often before him;
and only by that annoyance he seemed weary.
Well I perceived that he was sent from Heaven,
and I turned to my master; and he made a sign
that I should stay quiet and bow down to him.
Ah, how full of disdain he seemed to me!
He came to the gate and with a little wand
opened it, for there was no resistance.
“O you cast out of Heaven, despised people,”
he began upon the horrible threshold,
“from where is this insolence nourished in you?
Why do you kick against that will
whose end can never be cut short,
and which has more than once increased your pain?
What avails it to butt against the fates?
Your Cerberus, if you well remember,
still bears his chin and gullet peeled for it.”
Then he turned back along the filthy path,
and spoke no word to us, but had the look
of one whom other care urges and bites
than that of him who is before him;
and we moved our feet toward the city,
secure after the holy words.
We entered there without any strife;
and I, who had a desire to look upon
the condition that such a fortress encloses,
as soon as I was inside, I cast my eye around:
and I see on every hand a great plain,
full of sorrow and of wicked torment.
Just as at Arles, where the Rhône stagnates,
just as at Pola, near the Quarnaro
which closes Italy and bathes its borders,
the sepulchers make the whole place uneven,
so they did here on every side,
except that the manner there was more bitter;
for among the tombs flames were scattered,
by which they were so completely heated,
that no art requires iron hotter.
All their lids were held suspended,
and from them issued such harsh laments,
that they truly seemed from the miserable and the afflicted.
And I: “Master, who are these people
who, buried inside those arks,
make themselves heard with their sorrowful sighs?”
And he to me: “Here are the heresiarchs
with their followers, of every sect, and much
more than you think are the tombs laden.
Here like with like is buried,
and the monuments are more and less hot.”
And after he had turned to the right hand,
we passed between the torments and the high ramparts.
