Now my master goes along a secret path,
between the wall of the city and the torments,
my master, and I behind his shoulders.
“O supreme virtue, who through the impious circles
turn me,” I began, “as it pleases you,
speak to me, and satisfy my desires.
The people who lie within the sepulchers—
can they be seen? Already are lifted
all the lids, and no one stands guard.”
And he to me: “All will be sealed shut
when from Jehoshaphat they return here
with the bodies that up there they have left.
Their cemetery on this side have
with Epicurus all his followers,
who make the soul die with the body.
Therefore, to the question that you ask me
here within you will soon be satisfied,
and also to the desire that you keep silent.”
And I: “Good leader, I do not hold hidden
my heart from you except to speak little,
and you have not just now disposed me to this.”
«O Tuscan, who through the city of fire
go alive, thus speaking honorably,
may it please you to stop in this place.
Your speech makes you manifest
as a native of that noble fatherland
to which perhaps I was too troublesome».
Suddenly this sound came forth
from one of the tombs; so I drew,
fearing, a little closer to my guide.
And he said to me: «Turn around! What are you doing?
See there Farinata who has stood erect:
from the waist up you will see all of him».
I already had my face fixed on his;
and he rose up with his chest and with his brow
as if he held Hell in great scorn.
And the bold and ready hands of my guide
pushed me among the sepulchers toward him,
saying: «Let your words be measured».
When I was at the foot of his tomb,
he looked at me a little, and then, almost disdainful,
he asked me: «Who were your ancestors?».
I, who was desirous of obeying,
did not hide them from him, but opened all to him;
at which he raised his brows a little upward;
then said: «Fiercely were they adverse
to me and to my forebears and to my party,
so that for two times I scattered them».
«If they were driven out, they returned from every side»,
I answered him, «the one and the other time;
but yours have not learned that art well».
Then rose into uncovered view
a shade, beside that one, up to the chin:
I believe he had raised himself on his knees.
He looked around me, as if a desire
he had to see if another was with me;
and after his suspicion was all spent,
weeping he said: “If through this blind
prison you go by height of intellect,
where is my son? and why is he not with you?”
And I to him: “I do not come by myself:
he who waits there leads me through here,
one whom your Guido perhaps had in disdain.”
His words and the mode of punishment
had already to me read this one’s name;
therefore my answer was so complete.
Suddenly straightened up, he cried: “How?
Did you say ‘he had’? Does he not live still?
Does the sweet light not strike his eyes?”
When he became aware of some delay
that I was making before my reply,
he fell back supine and appeared no more outside.
But that other magnanimous one, at whose request
I had remained, did not change his aspect,
nor move his neck, nor bend his side;
and continuing from his first speech,
«If they have learned that art badly,» he said,
«that torments me more than this bed.
But not fifty times will be rekindled
the face of the lady who rules here,
before you will know how much that art weighs.
And so may you return to the sweet world,
tell me: why is that people so impious
against my kin in every one of its laws?».
Whence I to him: «The slaughter and great carnage
that made the Arbia colored red,
causes such prayers to be made in our temple».
After he had, sighing, shaken his head,
«At that I was not alone,» he said, «nor certainly
without cause would I have moved with the others.
But I was the one alone, there where it was suffered
by everyone to take Florence away,
he who defended her with an open face».
«Ah, so may your seed one day find rest,»
I prayed to him, «untie for me that knot
that has here entangled my judgment.
It seems that you see, if I hear right,
what time brings with it in the distance,
and in the present you have another mode».
«We see, like one who has a faulty light,
the things,» he said, «that are distant from us;
so much still does the highest Leader shine for us.
When they draw near or are, our intellect
is wholly vain; and if another does not bring us news,
we know nothing of your human state.
Therefore you can understand that all dead
will be our knowledge from that moment
when the gate of the future shall be closed».
Then, as if pricked by my own fault,
I said: «Now you shall tell, then, that fallen one
that his son is still joined with the living;
and if I was, before, mute in my reply,
make him know it was because I was already thinking
about the error that you have resolved for me».
And already my master was calling me back;or which I begged the spirit more quickly
to tell me who was with him.
He said to me: «Here with more than a thousand I lie:
here within is the second Frederick
and the Cardinal; and of the others I am silent».
Then he hid himself; and I toward the ancient
poet turned my steps, thinking back
on that speech which seemed hostile to me.
He moved on; and then, as we were walking,
he said to me: «Why are you so bewildered?».
And I satisfied his demand.
«Let your mind preserve what you have heard
against yourself,» that sage commanded me;
«and now attend here,» and he raised his finger:
«when you are before the sweet ray
of her whose beautiful eye sees all,
from her you will know of your life’s journey».
Next he moved his foot to the left:
we left the wall and went toward the middle
along a path that strikes into a valley,
which even up there made its stench unpleasant.
