On the edge of a high bank
that great broken stones made in a circle,
we came above a more cruel pen;
and here, for the horrible excess
of the stench that the deep abyss throws up,
we drew back, behind a lid
of a great tomb, where I saw an inscription
that said: ‘Pope Anastasius I hold,
whom Photinus drew from the straight path’.
“Our descent must needs be slow,
so that the sense first accustoms itself a little
to the sad breath; and then it will not be a concern.”
Thus the master; and I, “Some compensation,”
I said to him, “find, that the time may not pass
lost.” And he: “You see that of this I am thinking.”
«My son, within these stones,»
he then began to say, «are three small circles
in succession, like the ones you are leaving.
All are full of accursed spirits;
but so that the sight alone may later suffice you,
understand how and why they are confined.
Of every malice that earns hatred in Heaven,
injury is the end, and every such end
grieves others either by force or by fraud.
But because fraud is the evil proper to man,
it more displeases God; and so the fraudulent
are placed below, and more pain assails them.
The first circle is all of the violent;
but because force is done to three persons,
it is divided and constructed in three rings.
To God, to oneself, to the neighbor one can
do force, I mean in them and in their things,
as you shall hear with open reason.
Death by force and grievous wounds
are dealt to the neighbor, and to his possessions
ruin, arson, and damaging exactions;
whence murderers and all who maliciously wound,
spoilers and plunderers, are all tormented
by the first ring in different bands.
A man can have a violent hand against himself
and his own goods; and so in the second
ring it is fitting that he repent without profit
whoever deprives himself of your world,
gambles and squanders his own substance,
and weeps there where he ought to be joyful.
Force can be done against the Deity,
by denying and blaspheming Him in the heart,
and by scorning Nature and her goodness;
and so the smallest ring seals with its mark
both Sodom and Cahors
and who, scorning God in his heart, speaks.
Fraud, by which every conscience is gnawed,
a man can use on one who trusts in him
and on one who does not place trust.
This latter way seems to sever
only the bond of love that nature makes;
whence in the second circle are nested
hypocrisy, flattery, and one who bewitches,
falsehood, larceny, and simony,
panders, barrators, and similar filth.
By the other way is forgotten that love
which nature makes, and that which is then added,
from which special trust is created;
whence in the smallest circle, where the point
of the universe is, on which Dis sits,
every traitor is eternally consumed».
And I: «Master, most clearly proceeds your reasoning, and it distinguishes very well this abyss and the people it possesses. But tell me: those of the fat marsh, whom the wind drives, and whom the rain beats, and who clash with such bitter tongues, why are they not punished inside the ruddy city, if God holds them in His wrath? and if He does not, why are they in such a plight?». And he to me: «Why so deliriously wanders,» he said, «your intellect from what it is used to? or is your mind looking elsewhere? Do you not remember those words with which your *Ethics* treats at length the three dispositions that Heaven wills not, incontinence, malice, and mad bestiality? and how incontinence offends God less and earns less blame? If you consider well this sentence, and bring back to mind who they are who above, outside, sustain their penance, you will see well why from these felons they are divided, and why less wrathfully divine vengeance hammers them».
«O sun that heals all troubled sight,
you so content me when you resolve,
that doubting, no less than knowing, pleases me.
Turn back a little bit more»,
I said, «to where you say that usury offends
divine goodness, and untie the knot».
«Philosophy», he said to me, «for one who understands it,
notes, not just in one part alone,
how nature takes its course
from the divine intellect and from its art;
and if you note your Physics well,
you will find, not after many pages,
that your art follows that one, as it can,
as the pupil does the master;
so that your art is almost God's grandchild.
From these two, if you recall to mind
Genesis at the beginning, it is fitting
for people to take their life and to advance;
and because the usurer takes another way,
he scorns nature in herself and her follower,
since in another thing he places his hope.
But follow me now, for it pleases me to go;
for the Fishes are wriggling on the horizon,
and the Wain lies entirely over Caurus,
and the cliff is descended far over there».
