The place where to descend the bank
we came, was rugged and, for what was also there,
such, that every eye would have shunned it.
Like that landslide which on the flank
on this side of Trento struck the Adige,
either by earthquake or by failed support,
that from the top of the mountain, from where it moved,
to the plain the rock is so shattered,
that it would offer some path to one who was above:
such was the descent of that ravine;
and on the point of the broken precipice
the infamy of Crete was stretched out,
who was conceived in the false cow;
and when he saw us, he bit himself,
like one whom rage breaks from within.
My sage toward him cried: “Perhaps
you think that here is the Duke of Athens,
who up in the world dealt death to you?
Get away, beast, for this one does not come
instructed by your sister,
but goes to see your punishments.”
Like that bull that breaks its bonds in that moment
it has already received the mortal blow,
that cannot walk, but here and there leaps about,
I saw the Minotaur act in such a way;
and that sharp one cried: “Run to the pass;
while he rages, it is good that you descend.”
So we took our way down through the discharge
of those stones, which often moved
beneath my feet because of the new load.
I went along thinking; and he said: "You are thinking
perhaps of this ruin, which is guarded
by that bestial rage that I just now quenched.
Now I want you to know that the other time
that I descended down here into the lower hell,
this rock had not yet fallen.
But surely a little before, if I discern well,
He came who took the great prey
from Dis out of the supernal circle,
on all sides the deep, foul valley
trembled so, that I thought the universe
felt love, by which some believe
the world has more than once been turned to chaos;
and at that moment this ancient rock,
here and elsewhere, was so overturned.
But fix your eyes on the valley, for it approaches,
the river of blood in which boils
whoever through violence does harm to others."
O blind cupidity and foolish wrath,
that so spur us on in the short life,
and in the eternal then so badly soak us!
I saw a wide ditch bent into an arc,
like one that embraces the entire plain,
according to what my guide had said;
and between the foot of the bank and it, on a trail
ran centaurs, armed with arrows,
as they used to go hunting in the world.
Seeing us descend, each one stopped,
and from the troop three departed
with bows and little spears chosen beforehand;
and one shouted from afar: “To what torment
do you come, you who descend the slope?
Tell it from there; if not, I draw the bow.”
My master said: “The reply
we will make to Chiron there nearby:
ill was your will ever so hasty.”
Then he touched me, and said: “That one is Nessus,
who died for the lovely Deianira,
and made of himself his own revenge.
And that one in the middle, who looks at his chest,
is the great Chiron, who nurtured Achilles;
that other is Pholus, who was so full of wrath.
Around the ditch they go by thousands,
shooting with arrows whichever soul lifts itself
from the blood more than its guilt allotted it.”
We approached those swift beasts:
Chiron took an arrow, and with the nock
pushed his beard back behind his jaws.
When he had uncovered his great mouth,
he said to his companions: “Have you noticed
that the one behind moves what he touches?
Thus are not accustomed to do the feet of the dead.”
And my good leader, who was already at his chest,
where the two natures are joined,
replied: “Indeed he is alive, and so alone
it is my duty to show him the dark valley;
necessity brings him to it, and not delight.
One parted from singing hallelujah
who committed to me this new office:
he is not a robber, nor I a thieving soul.
But by that power by which I move
my steps through so savage a road,
give us one of yours, whom we may be near,
and who may show us where one fords,
and who may carry this one on his back,
for he is not a spirit that goes through the air.”
Chiron turned on his right haunch,
and said to Nessus: “Go back, and guide them,
and make way if another troop meets you.”
Now we moved on with our faithful guide
along the bank of the crimson boiling,
where the boiled ones were making high shrieks.
I saw people submerged up to their eyelids;
and the great centaur said: “These are tyrants
who laid hands on blood and on possessions.
Here they lament their pitiless damages;
here is Alexander, and fierce Dionysius
who made Sicily have sorrowful years.
And that brow that has such black hair,
is Azzolino; and that other who is blond,
is Opizzo da Esti, who in truth
was snuffed out by his stepson up in the world.”
Then I turned to the poet, and he said:
“Let him now be first to you, and I second.”
A little farther on the centaur fixed his gaze
upon a group who up to their throats
seemed to emerge from that boiling stream.
He showed us a shade off to one side, alone,
saying: “That one, in God’s own bosom, cleft
the heart that on the Thames still drips with blood.”
Then I saw people who out of the river
held their heads and even their whole chests;
and of these I recognized a great many.
Thus, more and more, it became shallow,
that blood, so that it cooked only the feet;
and that was where we made our way across the ditch.
“Just as you see on this side
the boiling stream that always diminishes,”
said the centaur, “I want you to believe
that on this other side its bed presses down
lower and lower, until it comes around
to where tyranny is made to groan.
Divine justice on this side stings
that Attila who was a scourge on earth,
and Pyrrhus and Sextus; and eternally milks
the tears, which with the boiling it unlocks,
from Rinier da Corneto, from Rinier Pazzo,
who waged so much war upon the highways.”
Then he turned and recrossed the ford.
