Nessus had not yet arrived on that side,
when we put ourselves into a wood
that was marked by no path.
Not green leaves, but of a dusky color;
not straight branches, but knotty and twisted;
no fruits were there, but twigs with poison.
Not so harsh thickets nor so dense have
those wild beasts that hold in hatred
between Cecina and Corneto the tilled lands.
Here the ugly Harpies make their nests,
who drove from the Strophades the Trojans
with a sad announcement of future harm.
They have wide wings, and human necks and faces,
feet with claws, and the great belly feathered;
they make laments upon the strange trees.
And the good master: “Before you enter farther,
know that you are in the second round,”
he began to say to me, “and you will be until
you come to the horrible great sand.
Therefore look well; so you will see
things that would take belief from my speech.”
I heard wails drawn from every side
and saw no person who was making them;
wherefore, all bewildered, I stopped.
I believe that he believed that I believed
that so many voices came forth, among those trunks,
from people who were hiding from us.
Therefore the master said: “If you break off
some little twig from one of these plants,
the thoughts you have will all be cut short.”
Then I put my hand forward a little
and plucked a small branch from a great thorn-bush;
and its trunk cried out: “Why do you break me?”
After it then became dark with blood,
it began again to say: “Why do you tear me?
Have you no spirit of pity at all?
We were men, and now are made into stumps:
truly your hand should be more merciful,
had we been the souls of serpents.”
As from a green log that is burning
at one of its ends, which at the other groans
and hisses for the wind that escapes,
so from that broken splinter came forth together
words and blood; at which I let the tip
fall, and stood like the man who fears.
«If he had been able to believe before,»
replied my sage, «O wounded soul,
what he had seen only in my rhyme,
he would not have stretched out his hand against you;
but the incredible thing made me
induce him to a deed that weighs on me myself.
But tell him who you were, so that by way of
some amends he may refresh your fame
in the world above, where he is permitted to return».
And the trunk: «So with sweet speech you entice me,
that I cannot be silent; and may it not burden you
that I am lured into a little speech.
I am he who held both the keys
of Frederick’s heart, and who turned them,
locking and unlocking, so gently,
that from his secrets I kept almost every man;
I bore faith to the glorious office,
so much that I lost my sleep and my pulses for it.
The harlot who never from the dwelling
of Caesar turned her tainted eyes,
the common death and vice of courts,
inflamed against me all the spirits;
and they, inflamed, so inflamed Augustus,
that my joyous honors turned to sad laments.
My spirit, from a disdainful taste,
believing by dying to flee disdain,
made me unjust against my just self.
By the new roots of this wood
I swear to you that I never broke faith
with my lord, who was so worthy of honor.
And if one of you returns to the world,
let him comfort my memory, which still lies
prostrate from the blow that envy gave it».
He waited a little, and then, «Since he is silent,»
the poet said to me, «do not lose the hour;
but speak, and ask of him, if more may please you».
Whence I to him: «You ask him further
of that which you believe would satisfy me;
for I could not, such pity pierces my heart».
Therefore he began again: «So may the man do for you
freely what your speech implores,
O imprisoned spirit, may it please you still
to tell us how the soul is bound
within these knots; and tell us, if you can,
if any ever from such limbs is set free».
Then the trunk blew strongly, and then
that wind was converted into such a voice:
«Briefly shall you be answered.
When the fierce soul departs
from the body from which it has torn itself,
Minos sends it to the seventh mouth.
It falls into the wood, and no part is chosen for it;
but there where fortune flings it,
there it sprouts like a grain of spelt.
It rises into a sapling, and a wild plant:
the Harpies, then feeding on its leaves,
make pain, and for the pain a window.
Like the others we shall come for our cast-off bodies,
but not, however, that any may clothe himself with it,
for it is not just to have what one has taken from oneself.
Here we shall drag them, and through the mournful
wood our bodies will be hung,
each on the thorn-bush of its grievous shade».
We were still waiting by the trunk,
believing that it wished to say more to us,
when we were surprised by a clamor,
like one who hears approaching
the boar and the hunt to his post,
who hears the beasts, and the branches rustle.
And behold, two from the left-hand side,
naked and scratched, fleeing so powerfully,
that they broke every thicket of the wood.
The one in front: «Now hurry, hurry, death!».
And the other, who seemed to lag too much,
shouted: «Lano, not so nimble were
your legs at the jousts of Toppo!».
And since perhaps his breath was failing him,
of himself and a bush he made one knot.
Behind them the wood was full
of black bitches, eager and running
like hounds that had broken from their chains.
Into the one who had hidden they set their teeth,
and they tore him apart piece by piece;
then carried off those aching limbs.
My guide then took me by the hand,
and led me to the bush that was weeping
through its bleeding gashes, all in vain.
«O Jacopo,» it was saying, «da Santo Andrea,
what good has it done you to make a screen of me?
what fault have I for your wicked life?».
When the master stood firm above it,
he said: «Who were you, who through so many points
breathe out with blood your sorrowful speech?».
And he to us: «O souls who have arrived
to see the shameful mangling
that has so disjoined my leaves from me,
gather them at the foot of the sad bush.
I was of the city that for the Baptist
changed its first patron; for which he for this
will always with his art make it sad;
and were it not that on the pass of Arno
there still remains some vision of him,
those citizens who then refounded it
upon the ashes that from Attila remained,
would have done their labor all in vain.
I made a gibbet for myself of my own house».
