After love for my native place
compelled me, I gathered the scattered leaves
and returned them to him, who was already faint.

Then we came to the edge where separates
the second round from the third, and where
is seen a horrible art of justice.

To well manifest the new things,
I say that we arrived at a plain
that from its bed removes every plant.

The sorrowful wood is a garland to it
around, as the sad ditch is to the wood;
there we stopped our steps at the very edge.

The ground was an arid and dense sand,
made of no other fashion than that
which by the feet of Cato was once trod upon.

O vengeance of God, how much you ought
to be feared by each one who reads
what was made manifest to my eyes!

Of naked souls I saw many flocks
that all wept most miserably,
and it seemed a diverse law was laid on them.

Supine on the ground some people lay,
some sat all huddled up,
and others walked continuously.

The group that went around was more numerous,
and that one less which lay in torment,
but had its tongue more loosened for wailing.

Over all the great sand, with a slow falling,
rained down broad flakes of fire,
like snow in the alps without wind.

Like those which Alexander in those hot parts
of India saw upon his host
flames fall, solid to the ground,

for which he took care to trample the soil
with his squadrons, so that the flame
was more easily extinguished while it was single:

such descended the eternal ardor;
whereby the sand was kindled, like tinder
under flint, to double the pain.

Without rest ever was the dance
of the miserable hands, now here, now there
shaking from themselves the fresh burning.
I began: “Master, you who overcome
all things, except for the hard demons
who at the gate’s entrance came out to meet us,
who is that great one who seems not to care
for the fire and lies scornful and twisted,
so that the rain does not seem to torture him?”.
And that same one, who had become aware
that I was asking my guide about him,
shouted: “What I was alive, such I am dead.
If Jove should weary his smith from whom
wrathfully he took the sharp thunderbolt
with which on my last day I was struck;
or if he should weary the others, shift by shift,
in Mongibello at the black forge,
calling ‘Good Vulcan, help, help!’,
just as he did at the battle of Phlegra,
and should shoot arrows at me with all his strength:
he could not have a joyful vengeance from it”.
Then my guide spoke with such force
that I had not heard him so loud:
“O Capaneus, in that it is not quenched,
your pride, you are more punished;
no martyrdom, other than your own rage,
would be for your fury a fitting pain”.
Then he turned to me with a better lip,
saying: “That was one of the seven kings
who besieged Thebes; and he had and seems to have
God in disdain, and little seems to prize Him;
but, as I told him, his own scornful acts
are for his breast very fitting ornaments.
Now come behind me, and see that you do not place,
yet, your feet on the burning sand;
but always keep your feet close to the wood”.
In silence we arrived where gushes
forth from the wood a small stream,
whose redness still makes me shudder.
Like the stream that issues from the Bulicame,
which the sinful women then divide among themselves,
so down over the sand did that one go.
Its bottom and both its banks
were made of stone, and the verges at the side;
from which I realized that the path was there.
“Among all the other things that I have shown you,
since we entered through the gate
whose threshold is denied to no one,
nothing has been seen by your eyes
as notable as is the present stream,
which quenches all the little flames above it.”
These words were from my guide;
for which I begged him to provide the meal
for which he had provided me the desire.
«In the middle of the sea lies a wasted land»,
he said then, «which is called Crete,
under whose king the world was once chaste.
A mountain is there that once was joyous
with water and with fronds, which was called Ida;
now it is deserted like a thing forlorn.
Rhea once chose it for the faithful cradle
of her son, and to conceal him better,
when he cried, had clamors made there.
Inside the mountain stands erect a great old man,
who keeps his shoulders turned toward Damietta
and looks at Rome as if it were his mirror.
His head is formed of fine gold,
and his arms and chest are pure silver,
then he is of brass down to the fork;
from there down he is all of choice iron,
except that the right foot is baked earth;
and on that one, more than on the other, he stands erect.
Each part, except the gold, is broken
by a fissure that drips with tears,
which, collected, carve that grotto.
Their course plunges down into this valley;
they make Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon;
then they go down through this narrow channel,
until, there where one descends no more,
they make Cocytus; and what that pool may be
you will see, so here it is not told».
And I to him: «If the present stream
derives thus from our world,
why does it appear to us only at this edge?».
And he to me: «You know that the place is round;
and although you have come a long way,
ever to the left, descending to the bottom,
you have not yet turned through the whole circle;
so that, if some new thing appears to us,
it should not bring wonder to your face».
And I again: «Master, where are found
Phlegethon and Lethe? For of the one you are silent,
and the other you say is made from this rain».
«In all your questions you certainly please me»,
he answered, «but the boiling of the red water
ought indeed to solve the one that you ask.
Lethe you shall see, but outside this pit,
there where the souls go to wash themselves
when their repented guilt is removed».
Then he said: «Now it is time to move away
from the wood; see that you come behind me:
the banks make a path, for they are not burned,
and over them every vapor is extinguished».
