Now one of the hard banks carries us on;
and the steam of the brook casts a shadow above,
so that from the fire it saves the water and the banks.
As the Flemings between Wissant and Bruges,
fearing the flood that rushes toward them,
make their screen so that the sea is driven back;
and as the Paduans along the Brenta,
to defend their towns and their castles,
before Carinthia feels the heat:
in such a likeness were those banks made,
although not so high nor so thick,
whoever the master was, had he made them.
Already we were so far removed from the wood
that I would not have seen where it was,
had I turned myself to look back,
when we met a troop of souls
that came along the bank, and each one
looked at us as one is accustomed in the evening
to look at another under a new moon;
and so toward us they sharpened their brows
as an old tailor does at the eye of his needle.
Thus eyed by such a family,
I was recognized by one, who took me
by the hem and cried out: “What a marvel!”.
And I, when he stretched his arm toward me,
fixed my eyes on his baked appearance,
so that his scorched face did not prevent
its recognition by my intellect;
and lowering my hand to his face,
I replied: “Are you here, ser Brunetto?”.
And he: “O my son, do not be displeased
if Brunetto Latino a little with you
turns back and lets the troop go on.”
I said to him: “With all my power, I pray you for it;
and if you wish that I sit down with you,
I will do it, if it pleases him with whom I go.”
“O son,” he said, “whoever of this flock
stops for a moment, lies then for a hundred years
without fanning himself when the fire strikes.
Therefore go on: I will come at your hem;
and then I will rejoin my troop,
which goes along weeping its eternal damages.”
I did not dare descend from the path
to go level with him; but my head bowed
I held like a man who walks with reverence.
He began: "What fortune or destiny
before your last day leads you down here?
and who is this one who shows the way?".
"Up there above, in the serene life,"
I answered him, "I lost myself in a valley,
before my age was full.
Just yesterday morning I turned my back on it:
this one appeared to me, as I was returning into it,
and he leads me home by this path".
And he to me: "If you follow your star,
you cannot fail to reach a glorious port,
if I discerned well in the beautiful life;
and if I had not died so early,
seeing heaven so benevolent to you,
I would have given you comfort in your work.
But that ungrateful, malignant people
that came down from Fiesole in ancient times,
and still smacks of the mountain and the rock,
will, for your good deeds, become your enemy;
and there is reason, for among the bitter sorbs
it is unfitting for the sweet fig to fruit.
Old fame in the world calls them blind;
they are a people greedy, envious, and proud:
from their customs make sure that you cleanse yourself.
Your fortune holds in store for you such honor,
that the one party and the other will have hunger
for you; but the grass will be far from the goat's beak.
Let the Fiesolan beasts make fodder
of themselves, and not touch the plant,
if any still springs up in their dung,
in which the holy seed may live again
of those Romans who remained there when
the nest of so much malice was made".
"If my request were fully granted,"
I answered him, "you would not yet be
placed in exile from human nature;
for in my mind is fixed, and now it grieves my heart,
the dear and good paternal image
of you when in the world, from time to time,
you taught me how man makes himself eternal:
and how much I hold it in gratitude, while I live
it is fitting that it be discerned in my tongue.
What you narrate of my course I write,
and keep it to be glossed with other text
by a lady who will know, if I reach her.
This much I want to be clear to you,
so long as my conscience does not chide me,
that to Fortune, as she wills, I am ready.
Such a pledge is not new to my ears:
therefore let Fortune turn her wheel
as she pleases, and the peasant his hoe".
My master then upon his right
cheek turned back and looked at me;
then said: "He listens well who takes note of it".
Nor for all that do I cease speaking as I go
with ser Brunetto, and I ask who are
his most noted and most eminent companions.
And he to me: “To know of some is good;
of the others it will be laudable to be silent,
for time would be too short for so much naming.
In short, know that all of them were clerics
and great men of letters and of great fame,
in the world soiled by one and the same sin.
Priscian goes on with that wretched crowd,
and Francesco d’Accorso also; and you could have seen there,
if you had had a craving for such scurf,
him who by the servant of the servants
was transferred from the Arno to the Bacchiglione,
where he left his ill-strained sinews.
I would say more; but my coming and my speech
cannot be longer, for I see
new smoke rising there from the sandy plain.
People come with whom I must not be.
Let my *Tesoro* be commended to you,
in which I am still alive, and I ask no more.”
Then he turned back, and seemed like one of those
who at Verona run for the green cloth
across the countryside; and of them he seemed
the one who wins, not the one who loses.
