I was already in a place where the rumbling was heard
of the water that was falling into the next circle,
like the buzzing that beehives make,
when three shades together broke away,
running, from a troop that was passing
under the rain of the harsh martyrdom.
They came toward us, and each one cried:
«Stop, you who by your clothes seem to us
to be someone from our wicked land».
Alas, what wounds I saw upon their limbs,
recent and old, burned by the flames!
It still pains me just to remember it.
At their cries my teacher stopped;
he turned his face toward me, and «Now wait»,
he said, «to these one should be courteous.
And if it were not for the fire that shoots down,
the nature of the place, I would say
that haste better suited you than them».
As we stopped, they began again
their ancient wail; and when they had reached us,
the three of them made a wheel of themselves.
As champions, naked and oiled, are wont to do,
eyeing their hold and their advantage
before they are struck and thrust at each other,
so, wheeling, each kept his face
directed at me, so that his neck made
a continuous journey opposite to his feet.
And «If the misery of this soft ground
and our scorched and peeling appearance
render us and our pleas contemptible»,
one began, «let our fame incline your soul
to tell us who you are, who your living feet
so securely scuff through Hell.
This one, in whose footsteps you see me tread,
although he goes naked and flayed,
was of a greater rank than you believe:
he was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;
Guido Guerra was his name, and in his life
he did much with his wisdom and his sword.
The other, who grinds the sand behind me,
is Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, whose voice
in the world above ought to have been welcome.
And I, who am placed in torment with them,
was Iacopo Rusticucci, and certainly
my savage wife harms me more than anything else».
If I had been sheltered from the fire,
I would have cast myself down among them,
and I believe the teacher would have permitted it;
but because I would have been burned and baked,
fear overcame my good desire
which made me greedy to embrace them.
Then I began: «Not scorn, but sorrow
your condition fixed within me,
so great that it will only slowly be stripped away,
as soon as this my lord said to me
words by which I came to think
that such people, as you are, were coming.
I am from your city, and ever always
your deeds and your honored names
I have recalled and heard with affection.
I leave the gall and go for sweet apples
promised to me by the truthful guide;
but first I must fall to the very center».
«So may your soul for a long time guide
your limbs,» that one then replied,
«and so may your fame shine after you,
tell us if courtesy and valor still dwell
in our city as they used to,
or if they have gone out of it completely;
for Guiglielmo Borsiere, who has suffered
with us a short while and goes there with his companions,
greatly torments us with his words».
«The new people and the sudden gains
have generated pride and excess,
Florence, in you, so that you already weep for it».
Thus I cried with my face uplifted;
and the three, who took that for an answer,
looked at one another as one does at the truth.
«If at other times it costs you so little,»
they all replied, «to satisfy another,
happy you, who speak so at your pleasure!
Therefore, if you escape from these dark places
and return to see again the beautiful stars,
when it will please you to say, ‘I was there,’
see that you speak of us to the people».
Then they broke their wheel, and in their flight
their nimble legs seemed to be wings.
An 'Amen' could not have been said
as quickly as they had vanished;
wherefore it seemed best to my master to depart.
I followed him, and we had gone but a little,
when the sound of the water was so near to us,
that in speaking we would scarcely have been heard.
Like that river which has its own path
first from Monte Viso toward the east,
from the left slope of the Apennine,
which is called Acquacheta above, before
it descends down into its low bed,
and at Forlì is vacant of that name,
it thunders there above San Benedetto
dell'Alpe in falling at a single drop
where a thousand should have found reception;
so, down from a steep bank,
we found that tinted water resounding,
so that in a short time it would have offended the ear.
I had a cord girt around me,
and with it I had once thought
to take the leopard with the painted skin.
After I had completely untied it from me,
just as my leader had commanded me,
I handed it to him, knotted and coiled.
At which he turned himself toward the right side,
and some distance from the edge
he cast it down into that deep abyss.
‘Surely some new thing must respond,’
I said within myself, ‘to the new signal
that the master follows so with his eye.’
Ah, how cautious men ought to be
near those who see not only the work,
but with their wisdom look into the thoughts!
He said to me: “Soon will come up from below
what I await and what your thought dreams of;
soon it must be discovered to your sight.”
Always to that truth which has the face of a lie
a man should close his lips as long as he can,
because without fault it brings him shame;
but here I cannot be silent; and by the notes
of this comedy, reader, I swear to you,
so may they not be void of long-lasting grace,
that I saw through that thick and dark air
a figure come swimming upward,
a marvel to every steadfast heart,
just as he returns who sometimes goes down
to free the anchor that has snagged
a reef or something else hidden in the sea,
who stretches up and draws in his feet.
