«Behold the beast with the sharp tail,
that passes mountains and breaks walls and arms!
Behold her who stinks up the whole world!».
Thus my leader began to speak to me;
and beckoned to it that it should come to the bank,
near the end of the walked-on stone path.
And that filthy image of fraud
came on, and brought to land its head and bust,
but on the bank it did not draw its tail.
Its face was the face of a just man,
so benign was its outward skin,
and all the rest of its trunk was of a serpent;
it had two paws, hairy up to the armpits;
the back and the chest and both the flanks
it had painted with knots and little wheels.
With more colors, laid on and overlaid,
never did Tartars or Turks make cloths,
nor were such webs by Arachne laid.
As sometimes barges stand on the shore,
that are partly in water and partly on land,
and as there among the guzzling Germans
the beaver sets itself to make its war,
so the most wicked beast was positioned
on the edge that is of stone and encloses the great sand.
In the void its whole tail was twitching,
twisting upward its venomous fork
that in the guise of a scorpion armed its point.
My guide said: “Now it is fitting that our way
turn a little, as far as that
wicked beast that lies down over there.”
Therefore we descended to the right breast,
and we made ten steps upon the very edge,
to well avoid the sand and the little flame.
And when we had come to it,
a little further on I see upon the sand
people sitting near the empty space.
Here the master: “So that a full
experience of this circle you may carry away,”
he said to me, “go, and see their condition.
Let your talks there be brief;
while you return, I will speak with this one,
that it may grant us its strong shoulders.”
Thus again upon the extreme head
of that seventh circle, all alone
I went, where the mournful people were sitting.
Out through their eyes their sorrow was bursting;
here, there, they helped themselves with their hands
now from the vapors, now from the hot ground:
in no other way do dogs in summer,
now with the snout, now with the paw, when they are bitten
either by fleas, or by flies, or by horseflies.
After I set my eyes upon the faces of some,
on whom the painful fire falls,
I recognized none of them; but I took note
that from the neck of each there hung a purse
which had a certain color and a certain emblem,
and on this it seems their eye does feast.
And as I came among them, looking,
on a yellow purse I saw an azure
that had the face and bearing of a lion.
Then, proceeding on the course of my gaze,
I saw another, red as blood,
showing a goose whiter than butter.
And one who with a sow, blue and pregnant,
had marked his small white pouch,
said to me: “What are you doing in this pit?
Now be off; and because you are still alive,
know that my neighbor Vitaliano
will sit here at my left side.
With these Florentines I am a Paduan:
often they deafen my ears
shouting: ‘Let the sovereign knight come,
who will bring the purse with three goats!’”
Here he twisted his mouth and stuck out
his tongue, like an ox that licks its nose.
And I, fearing that to stay longer would vex
him who had warned me to stay but a little,
turned back from the weary souls.
I found my guide who had already climbed
onto the croup of the fierce animal,
and said to me: “Now be strong and bold.
Henceforth we descend by such stairs;
mount in front, for I wish to be in the middle,
so that the tail cannot do you harm.”
Like one who is so close to the chill
of the quartan fever, that his nails are already pale,
and trembles all over just looking at the shade,
such I became at the words he spoke;
but his commands brought on me shame,
which before a good lord makes a servant strong.
I settled myself on those monstrous shoulders;
I wanted to say, but the voice did not come
as I thought: ‘Make sure that you embrace me.’
But he, who at other times had helped me
in other peril, as soon as I mounted
with his arms entwined and sustained me;
and said: “Geryon, move now:
let the circles be wide, and the descent be slow;
consider the new burden that you have.”
As a small boat goes from its place
backward, backward, so he took himself from there;
and when he felt himself completely free,
there where his chest had been, he turned his tail,
and stretched it out, moved it like an eel,
and with his paws gathered the air to himself.
Greater fear I do not believe there was
when Phaethon abandoned the reins,
for which the sky, as it still appears, was scorched;
nor when wretched Icarus the loins
felt unfeathered by the heated wax,
his father crying to him “You take a bad way!”,
than was mine, when I saw that I was
in the air on every side, and saw extinguished
every sight except for that of the beast.
She goes along swimming slowly, slowly;
she wheels and descends, but I do not notice it
except that on my face and from below wind blows on me.
I already heard on the right hand the whirlpool
make beneath us a horrible roar,
for which with my eyes downward I stick my head out.
Then I was more timid at the precipice,
because I saw fires and heard wails;
at which, trembling all over, I crouch down.
And I saw then, for I did not see it before,
the descending and the circling by the great torments
that were approaching from different sides.
Like the falcon that has been long on the wing,
that without seeing lure or bird
makes the falconer say “Alas, you descend!”,
descends weary from where it moves swiftly,
in a hundred wheels, and sets itself far
from its master, disdainful and sullen;
so at the bottom Geryon set us
at the very foot of the jagged cliff,
and, having discharged our persons,
vanished like an arrow from the bowstring.
