There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,
all of stone the color of iron,
like the circle that turns around it.
In the very middle of the malignant field
yawns a well, very wide and deep,
of which, in its place, I will tell the structure.
The belt that thus remains is round
between the well and the foot of the high, hard bank,
and has its bottom divided into ten valleys.
As where, for the guard of the walls,
more and more ditches encircle the castles,
the part where they are renders a figure,
such an image those made there;
and as at such fortresses from their thresholds
to the outer bank there are little bridges,
so from the base of the rock spurs of rock
moved that cut across the banks and the ditches
down to the well that truncates and gathers them.
In this place, shaken from the back
of Geryon, we found ourselves; and the poet
kept to the left, and I moved behind him.
On my right hand I saw new pity,
new torment and new scourgers,
with which the first pouch was replete.
In the bottom were the naked sinners;
from the middle on this side they came toward our face,
on the other side with us, but with greater strides,
as the Romans, for the great host,
in the year of the Jubilee, upon the bridge
have arranged a way for the people to pass,
so that on one side all have their brows
toward the Castle and go to Saint Peter's,
from the other bank they go toward the Mount.
On this side, on that, upon the grim stone
I saw horned demons with great whips,
who beat them cruelly from behind.
Ah, how they made them lift their heels
at the first blows! already no one
awaited the second or the third.
As I was going, my eyes on one
were met; and I so quickly said:
“Already of seeing this one I am not fasting.”
Wherefore I, to make him out, fixed my feet;
and the sweet duke with me halted,
and consented that I might go back a ways.
And that whipped one thought to hide himself
by lowering his face; but it little availed him,
for I said: “O you who cast your eye to the ground,
if the features that you wear are not false,
you are Venedico Caccianemico.
But what brings you to such stinging sauces?”
And he to me: “Unwillingly I say it;
but your clear speech compels me,
which makes me remember the ancient world.
I was the one who Ghisolabella
led to do the will of the marquis,
however the ugly story may sound.
And not only I, a Bolognese, weep here;
rather this place is so full of us,
that so many tongues are not now taught
to say ‘sipa’ between Savena and Reno;
and if of this you want faith or testimony,
recall to mind our avaricious nature.”
As he was speaking, a demon struck him
with his whip, and said: “Away,
pimp! here there are no women for coin.”
I rejoined myself with my guide;
then with a few steps we came
to where a rocky bridge issued from the bank.
Very lightly we climbed it;
and turning right up along its ridge,
from those eternal circles we departed.
When we were there where it arches over
below to give passage to the scourged,
the duke said: “Hold fast, and make it so that strikes
your gaze upon these other ill-born,
whose faces you have not yet seen
because they have been going along with us.”
From the old bridge we watched the line
that was coming toward us from the other side,
and which the whip likewise drove on.
And the good master, without my asking,
said to me: “Look at that great one who comes,
and for all his pain seems to shed no tears:
what a regal aspect he still retains!
That is Jason, who by heart and by wit
deprived the Colchians of the ram.
He passed by the isle of Lemnos
after the bold and pitiless women
had given all their males to death.
There with signs and with ornate words
he deceived Hypsipyle, the young girl
who first had deceived all the others.
He left her there, pregnant and all alone;
such a crime condemns him to such a martyrdom;
and also for Medea vengeance is taken.
With him goes whoever in such a way deceives;
and let this be enough about the first valley
to know and of those it holds in its jaws.”
We were already there where the narrow path
crosses over the second bank,
and makes of that a shoulder for another arch.
From there we heard people who were whimpering
in the next ditch and who snorted with their snout,
and beat themselves with their own palms.
The banks were encrusted with a mold,
from the vapor from below that cakes itself there,
that with the eyes and the nose made a battle.
The bottom is so dark that there is no place for us
to see without climbing to the ridge
of the arch, where the bridge looms highest.
There we came; and from there down in the ditch
I saw people plunged in a filth
that seemed to have come from human privies.
And while I searched there below with my eye,
I saw one with a head so smeared with shit,
that it did not appear if he were layman or cleric.
He shouted at me: "Why are you so greedy
to stare more at me than at the other filthy ones?".
And I to him: "Because, if I remember correctly,
I have seen you before with your hair dry,
and you are Alessio Interminei of Lucca:
therefore I single you out more than all the others".
And he then, beating his pate:
"Down here the flatteries have submerged me
with which my tongue was never weary".
After this the duke said, "See that you push,"
he told me, "your gaze a little further forward,
so that your eye may well reach the face
of that filthy and disheveled wench
who there scratches herself with her shitty fingernails,
and now squats and now stands on her feet.
That is Thaïs, the whore who replied
to her lover when he said, 'Have I great
favor with you?': 'Nay, marvelous!'.
And with this let our sight be sated".
