O Simon Magus, o wretched followers
who the things of God, which of goodness
ought to be spouses, and you rapacious ones
for gold and for silver adulterate,
now it is fitting that for you the trumpet sound,
because in the third ditch you are.
Already we were, at the following tomb,
mounted on the rock-bridge in that part
that right over the middle of the ditch hangs.
O supreme wisdom, how great is the art
that you show in heaven, on earth, and in the evil world,
and how justly your power dispenses!
I saw along the sides and on the bottom
the livid stone full of holes,
all of one width and each one was round.
They did not seem to me less wide nor larger
than those that are in my beautiful San Giovanni,
made as a place for the baptizers;
one of which, not yet many years ago,
I broke for one who was drowning inside it:
and let this be a seal that undeceives every man.
Out of the mouth of each one protruded
a sinner’s feet and legs
up to the calf, and the rest inside stayed.
The soles were on all of them both on fire;
because of which the joints twitched so strongly,
that they would have snapped ropes and withes.
As the flaming of greasy things is wont
to move just over the outer surface,
such was it there from the heels to the toes.
“Who is that one, master, who torments himself
twitching more than his other companions,”
I said, “and whom a redder flame sucks?”
And he to me: “If you want me to carry you
down there by that bank which lies lower,
from him you will learn of himself and of his wrongs.”
And I: “What pleases you is beautiful to me:
you are lord, and know that I do not depart
from your will, and you know what is left unspoken.”
Then we came onto the fourth embankment;
we turned and descended on the left hand
down there into the narrow and pitted bottom.
The good master not yet from his hip
did set me down, till he brought me to the fissure
of the one who was weeping with his shanks.
“O whoever you are who holds the upper part below,
sad soul stuck in like a stake,”
I began to say, “if you can, speak a word.”
I stood like the friar who confesses
the treacherous assassin, who, after he is fixed,
calls him back so that death is delayed.
And he cried out: “Are you already standing there,
are you already standing there, Boniface?
The writing has lied to me by several years.
Are you so soon sated with that wealth
for which you did not fear to take by deceit
the beautiful lady, and then to ravage her?”
I became like those who stand,
from not understanding what is answered to them,
as if mocked, and know not how to reply.
Then Virgil said: “Tell him quickly:
‘I am not he, I am not he whom you believe’”;
and I replied as was imposed on me.
At which the spirit twisted his feet completely;
then, sighing and with a tearful voice,
said to me: “Then what do you ask of me?
If to know who I am concerns you so much
that you have for it run down the bank,
know that I was clothed in the great mantle;
and truly I was a son of the she-bear,
so greedy to advance the cubs,
that up there I put wealth, and here myself, into the purse.
Below my head are the others dragged
who preceded me in simony,
flattened within the fissures of the stone.
There below I too shall fall when
he will come whom I believed you to be,
when I made the sudden question.
But the time is already longer that my feet have cooked
and that I have been thus upside down,
than he will stay planted with his red feet:
for after him will come one of more ugly work,
from toward the west, a pastor without law,
such that it is fitting he cover both him and me.
A new Jason will he be, of whom one reads
in Maccabees; and as to that one was pliant
his king, so will be to him he who rules France.”
I do not know if I was here too bold,
that I replied to him in this strain:
"Pray, now tell me: how much treasure did
Our Lord want at first from Saint Peter
before he put the keys into his keeping?
Certainly he asked for nothing but 'Come behind me.'
Nor did Peter nor the others take from Matthias
gold or silver, when he was chosen by lot
for the place that the guilty soul had lost.
Therefore stay put, for you are justly punished;
and guard well the ill-gotten money
that made you be so bold against Charles.
And if it were not that it is still forbidden me
by the reverence for the supreme keys
that you held in the happy life,
I would use words even heavier;
for your avarice saddens the world,
trampling the good and lifting up the wicked.
Of you shepherds the Evangelist was aware,
when she who sits upon the waters
was seen by him to fornicate with the kings;
she who was born with the seven heads,
and from the ten horns had her argument,
as long as virtue was pleasing to her husband.
You have made a god for yourselves of gold and silver;
and what difference is there between you and the idolater,
except that he prays to one, and you to a hundred?
Ah, Constantine, of how much evil was the mother,
not your conversion, but that dowry
that the first rich father took from you!"
And while I was singing such notes to him,
whether it was wrath or conscience that bit him,
he was kicking hard with both his feet.
I do believe that it pleased my guide,
with so content a lip he listened all the while
to the sound of the true words expressed.
Therefore with both his arms he took me;
and when he had me fully on his breast,
he climbed back up by the way he had come down.
Nor did he tire of having me held close to him,
so he carried me up to the summit of the arch
that is the passage from the fourth to the fifth bank.
There gently he set down the burden,
gentle on the rough and steep rock
that for goats would be a hard passage.
Then another valley was discovered to me.
