Of a new punishment I must make verses
and give matter to the twentieth canto
of the first canticle, which is of the submerged.
I was already completely disposed
to look into the uncovered depth,
which was bathed in anguished weeping;
and I saw people through the round valley
coming, silent and weeping, at the pace
that litanies make in this world.
As my gaze descended lower on them,
marvelously appeared to be twisted
each one between the chin and the start of the chest,
for the face was turned toward the loins,
and backward they had to come,
because seeing forward was taken from them.
Perhaps by force of paralysis before now
someone has been so completely twisted;
but I have not seen it, nor do I believe it to be so.
If God let you, reader, take fruit
from your reading, now think for yourself
how I could keep my face dry,
when I saw our image up close
so twisted, that the weeping from the eyes
bathed the buttocks through the cleft.
I surely wept, leaning on one of the rocks
of the hard cliff, so that my guide
said to me: “Are you still one of the other fools?
Here piety lives when it is well dead;
who is more wicked than he
who brings passion to the divine judgment?”
Lift your head, lift it, and see him for whom
the earth opened before the eyes of the Thebans;
for which they all cried: “Where are you rushing,
Amphiaraus? Why do you leave the war?”.
And he did not stop his plunge down to the valley
until he reached Minos who seizes every one.
Look how he has made a chest of his shoulders;
because he wished to see too far ahead,
he looks behind and walks a backward path.
See Tiresias, who changed his semblance
when from a male a female he became,
changing all of his limbs completely;
and afterward, he had to strike once more
the two entwined serpents with his rod,
before he could regain his manly plumes.
Aruns is he whose back is to that one's belly,
who in the mountains of Luni, where the Carraran
dwelling below wields his hoe,
had his cave among the white marbles
for his abode; from which to watch the stars
and sea his view was not cut off.
And she who covers her breasts, which you cannot see,
with her unbound tresses,
and has all her hairy skin on that other side,
was Manto, who searched through many lands;
then she settled there where I was born;
wherefore it pleases me a little that you listen.
After her father departed from life
and the city of Bacchus became a slave,
she for a long time roamed the world.
Up in beautiful Italy lies a lake,
at the foot of the Alp that locks in Germany
above the Tyrol, which is named Benaco.
By a thousand springs, I think, and more is bathed,
between Garda and Val Camonica and the Pennine,
the water that stagnates in the said lake.
A place is in the middle there where the Trentine
shepherd and he of Brescia and the Veronese
could give his blessing, if he made that journey.
Sits Peschiera, a fair and strong fortress
to face the Brescians and the Bergamasks,
where the shore around is lowest.
There it is fitting that everything should fall
that in the lap of Benaco cannot stay,
and it becomes a river down through green pastures.
As soon as the water sets its head to run,
no longer Benaco, but Mincio it is called
as far as Governolo, where it falls into the Po.
It has not run far, when it finds a marshland,
in which it spreads out and becomes a swamp;
and in summer it is wont at times to be unwholesome.
Passing that way the cruel virgin
saw land, in the middle of the fen,
without cultivation and bare of inhabitants.
There, to flee all human company,
she stayed with her servants to practice her arts,
and lived, and there she left her empty body.
The men then who were scattered round about
gathered at that place, which was strong
because of the swamp it had on every side.
They made the city over those dead bones;
and for her who first chose the place,
they named it Mantua, without other augury.
Its people within were already more numerous,
before the folly of Casalodi
was deceived by Pinamonte.
Therefore I tell you that, if you ever hear
my city's origin told otherwise,
let no falsehood defraud the truth.”
And I: «Master, your reasonings
are so certain to me and so take my faith,
that others would be to me as spent coals.
But tell me, of the people who proceed,
if you see any worthy of note;
for only to that my mind now turns».
Then he said to me: «That one who from his cheek
stretches his beard onto his brown shoulders,
was—when Greece was so void of males
that scarce any remained for the cradles—
an augur, and with Calchas gave the sign
in Aulis to cut the first cable.
Eurypylus was his name, and so my high
tragedy sings of him in a certain place:
you know this well, who know it all.
That other one, so lean in the flanks,
was Michael Scot, who truly
knew the game of magical deceptions.
See Guido Bonatti; see Asdente,
who wishes now he had attended to the leather
and the thread, but too late repents.
See the wretched women who left the needle,
the shuttle, and the spindle, and made themselves diviners;
they worked spells with herbs and with images.
But come on now, for Cain with his thorns
already holds the boundary of both hemispheres
and touches the wave below Seville;
and yesternight the moon was full:
you must well remember it, for it did not harm you
at any time within the deep wood».
Thus he spoke to me, and we went on meanwhile.
