Thus from bridge to bridge, speaking of other things
that my comedy does not care to sing,
we came; and we were at the summit, when
we stopped to see the other fissure
of Malebolge and the other vain laments;
and I saw it was marvelously dark.
As in the arsenal of the Venetians
the tenacious pitch boils in the winter
to re-caulk their unsound ships,
for they cannot sail—instead of which
one makes his new ship and another plugs up
the ribs of one that has made many voyages;
one hammers at the prow and one at the stern;
another makes oars and another twists ropes;
one patches the jib and the mainsail—:
so, not by fire but by divine art,
a thick pitch boiled there below,
which coated the bank on every side.
I saw it, but I did not see in it
anything but the bubbles that the boiling raised,
and the whole of it swell, and settle down compressed.
While I was staring fixedly down there,
my guide, saying "Look out, look out!",
drew me to him from the place where I stood.
Then I turned like the man who is slow
to see that which he must flee
and whom a sudden fear unnerves,
who, for the sake of seeing, does not delay his departure:
and I saw behind us a black devil
coming, running up over the crag.
Ah, how fierce he was in his appearance!
and how harsh he seemed to me in his actions,
with wings open and light upon his feet!
His shoulder, which was sharp and proud,
was burdened with a sinner by both haunches,
and he held clutched the sinew of his feet.
From our bridge he said: “O Malebranche,
here is one of the elders of Santa Zita!
Put him under, for I am returning again
to that land, which is well supplied with them:
every man there is a barrator, except for Bonturo;
for money, a ‘no’ is made a ‘yes’ there.”
He threw him down there, and over the hard rock
he turned; and never was a mastiff unleashed
with so much haste to chase the thief.
That one plunged in, and came up hunched over;
but the demons who had cover of the bridge
cried: “Here the Holy Face has no place!
Here one swims otherwise than in the Serchio!
Therefore, if you do not want our grappling hooks,
do not make yourself too visible above the pitch.”
Then they poked him with more than a hundred hooks,
they said: “It is fitting you dance here covered,
so that, if you can, you may pilfer in secret.”
Not otherwise do cooks to their scullions
make them plunge into the middle of the cauldron
the meat with their hooks, so that it does not float.
The good master “So that it may not appear
that you are here,” said to me, “crouch down
behind a rock, that you may have some screen;
and for any offense that may be done to me,
do not you fear, for I have these matters reckoned,
because another time I was at such a scuffle.”
Then he passed beyond the head of the bridge;
and when he arrived on the sixth bank,
it was needful for him to have a confident brow.
With that fury and with that tempest
with which dogs rush out upon the poor wretch
who suddenly begs where he has stopped,
those from under the little bridge came out,
and turned all their grappling hooks against him;
but he cried: “Let none of you be wicked!
Before your hook takes me,
let one of you come forward who may hear me,
and then take counsel on hooking me.”
They all shouted: “Let Malacoda go!”;
so one moved—and the others stood still—
and came to him saying: “What good will it do him?”
“Do you believe, Malacoda, that you see me here,
to have come,” said my master,
“already safe from all your obstructions,
without divine will and a favorable fate?
Let us pass, for it is willed in Heaven
that I show another this savage path.”
Then his pride was so fallen
that he let the hook drop at his feet,
and said to the others: “Now let him not be struck.”
And my leader to me: “O you who sit
among the splinters of the bridge, crouching low,
you may now safely return to me.”
At which I moved and came to him quickly;
and the devils all pressed forward,
so that I feared they would not keep their pact;
just so I once saw the foot soldiers fear,
who marched out under treaty from Caprona,
seeing themselves among so many enemies.
I pressed myself with my whole body
close to my leader, and did not turn my eyes
from their appearance, which was not good.
They lowered their hooks, and “Want me to touch him,”
said one to another, “on the rump?”
And they answered: “Yes, give him a good jab.”
But that demon who was holding discourse
with my leader, turned around very quickly
and said: “Stop, stop, Scarmiglione!”
Then he said to us: “To go further by this
rocky bridge is not possible, because the sixth arch
lies all shattered at the bottom.
And if you still wish to go forward,
go along this ridge;
nearby is another rocky bridge that makes a way.
Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,
one thousand two hundred and sixty-six
years were complete since the way was broken here.
I am sending some of mine over that way
to see if anyone is airing himself out;
go with them, for they will not be wicked.”
«Step forward, Alichino, and Calcabrina»,
he began to say, «and you, Cagnazzo;
and let Barbariccia lead the ten.
Let Libicocco come forward, and Draghignazzo,
tusked Cirïatto and Graffiacane
and Farfarello and mad Rubicante.
Search around the boiling pitch;
let these two be safe as far as the other ridge
that goes all unbroken over the dens».
«Alas, master, what is this that I see?»,
I said, «ah, let us go alone without an escort,
if you know how to go; for I, for my part, do not ask for it.
If you are as shrewd as you usually are,
do you not see how they grind their teeth
and with their brows threaten us with woes?».
And he to me: «I do not want you to fear;
let them grind on at their own pleasure,
for they do that for the suffering boiled ones».
Along the left bank they made a turn;
but first each had pressed his tongue fast
with his teeth, toward their leader, for a signal;
and he had made a trumpet of his ass.
