I have seen cavalry break camp before,
and begin an assault and make their review,
and at times depart for their escape;
I have seen scouts in your land,
o Aretines, and seen raiding parties go,
striking in tournaments and running a joust;
sometimes with trumpets, and sometimes with bells,
with drums and with signals from castles,
and with things of our own and with foreign ones;
but never with so strange a reed-pipe
did I see cavalry move, nor foot soldiers,
nor ship by a sign of land or of star.
We went on with the ten demons.
Ah, what savage company! But in the church
with the saints, and in the tavern with the gluttons.
Yet my attention was fixed on the pitch,
to see every condition of the ditch
and of the people who were burned within.
As dolphins, when they give a sign
to sailors with the arch of their back
that they should prepare to save their ship,
so at times, to alleviate the pain,
one of the sinners would show his back
and hide it in less time than a lightning flash.
And as at the edge of the water of a ditch
the frogs sit with only their snouts out,
so that they hide their feet and the rest of their bulk,
so stood the sinners on every side;
but as Barbariccia drew near,
so they drew back beneath the boiling pitch.
I saw, and my heart still shudders at it,
one waiting so, as it happens
that one frog remains and the other spurts away;
and Graffiacan, who was nearest to him,
hooked him by his pitch-matted locks
and drew him up, so that he seemed to me an otter.
I already knew the name of all of them,
for I had noted them when they were chosen,
and after they called to one another, I paid attention how.
«O Rubicante, see that you set
your talons on his back, so that you flay him!»,
shouted all the accursed ones together.
And I: «My master, if you can, arrange
that you learn who the wretched one is
come into the hands of his adversaries».
My leader drew near to his side;
he asked him whence he was, and that one replied:
«I was born in the kingdom of Navarre.
My mother placed me as a servant to a lord,
she who had borne me to a scoundrel,
a destroyer of himself and of his things.
Then I was of the household of the good king Theobald;
there I set myself to practicing barratry,
for which I render account in this heat».
And Ciriatto, from whose mouth issued
on each side a tusk like a boar’s,
made him feel how one of them could rip.
Among evil cats the mouse had come;
but Barbariccia locked him in his arms
and said: «Stay back, while I fork him».
And to my master he turned his face;
«Ask», he said, «further, if you more desire
to know from him, before another undoes him».
The leader therefore: «Now tell: of the other culprits
do you know any who is Italian
under the pitch?». And that one: «I parted,
a short while ago, from one who was from near there.
Would that I were still covered with him,
for I would not fear claw nor hook!».
And Libicocco, «We have endured too much»,
said; and seized his arm with the hook,
so that, tearing, he carried off a strip of flesh.
Draghignazzo also wanted to get a grip
down on his legs; at which their decurion
turned himself all around with a menacing look.
When they were somewhat pacified,
to him, who still gazed at his wound,
my leader asked without delay:
«Who was he from whom you say you made
a bad parting to come to the bank?».
And he replied: «It was friar Gomita,
he of Gallura, vessel of every fraud,
who had his master’s enemies in his hand,
and dealt with them so that each one of them praises it.
He took their money and let them go smoothly,
so he says; and in other offices too
he was a barrator not small, but sovereign.
With him consorts master Michel Zanche
of Logodoro; and to speak of Sardinia
their tongues do not feel tired.
Alas, see the other one who is baring his teeth;
I would say more, but I fear that he
is not preparing to scratch my scabs».
And the great provost, turned to Farfarello
who was rolling his eyes to strike,
said: «Get over there, wicked bird!».
«If you wish to see or to hear»,
the frightened one then began again,
«Tuscans or Lombards, I shall make some come;
but let the Malebranche stand back a bit,
so that they will not fear their vengeances;
and I, sitting in this same spot,
for the one that I am, will make seven come
when I whistle, as is our custom
to do when one of us puts himself outside».
Cagnazzo at this speech raised his snout,
shaking his head, and said: «Hear the malice
that he has devised in order to throw himself down!».
At which he, who had snares in great abundance,
replied: «Too malicious am I indeed,
when I procure for my own a greater sadness».
Alichino did not hold back and, in defiance
of the others, said to him: «If you go down,
I will not come after you at a gallop,
but I will beat my wings over the pitch.
Let the ridge be left, and let the bank be our shield,
to see if you alone are worth more than we are».
O you who read, you will hear of a new sport:
each one turned his eyes to the other side,
he first, who to doing this was most unwilling.
The Navarrese chose his time well;
he planted his feet on the ground, and in an instant
he leaped and from their purpose freed himself.
At this each one was pricked by guilt,
but he most who was the cause of the failure;
therefore he moved and cried: «You are caught!».
But it availed him little: for his wings could not
outpace the fear; that one went under,
and this one flying pulled his chest up:
not otherwise the duck which, suddenly,
when the falcon nears, dives down below,
and he returns upward, angry and beaten.
Calcabrina, enraged by the trick,
flying, stayed behind him, eager
that the other might escape, so he could have a brawl;
and as the barrator disappeared,
so he turned his talons on his companion,
and grappled with him above the ditch.
But the other was indeed a fierce sparrowhawk
to claw him well, and both of them
fell into the middle of the boiling pond.
The heat was an immediate un-grappler;
but still, to rise from there was nothing,
so limed were their wings.
Barbariccia, grieving with his others,
made four of them fly from the other bank
with all their hooks, and very quickly
on this side and that they descended to their posts;
they stretched their hooks toward the ensnared ones,
who were already cooked within the crust.
And we left them thus entangled.
