Silent, alone, without company
we went on, one before and the other after,
as Minor Friars go along their way.
My thought was turned to the fable of Aesop
by the present brawl,
where he told of the frog and the mouse;
for ‘mo’ and ‘issa’ are no more alike
than this one is with that, if one carefully couples
beginning and end with a fixed mind.
And as one thought bursts forth from another,
so from that one another was then born,
which made my first fear double.
I thought thus: ‘These, because of us,
are mocked with such injury and derision
that I believe it vexes them greatly.
If anger is added to their ill will,
they will come after us more cruel
than the dog to the hare that it snaps at.’
Already I felt all my hair bristle
with fear and I was looking intently behind,
when I said: “Master, if you do not hide
yourself and me quickly, I am in terror
of the Malebranche. We have them behind us already;
I imagine them so, that I already hear them.”
And he: “If I were of leaded glass,
I would not draw your outward image
more quickly to me, than I receive the one from within.
Just now your thoughts came among mine,
with a similar motion and a similar face,
so that of both I made a single plan.
If it is so that the right bank lies in such a way
that we can descend into the next ditch,
we will flee the imagined chase.”
He had not yet finished offering this counsel,
when I saw them coming with wings outstretched,
not far off, wanting to take us.
My leader suddenly seized me,
like a mother who is awakened by a noise
and sees the flames lit near her,
who takes her son and flees and does not stop,
caring more for him than for herself,
so much that she wears only a shift;
and down from the crest of the hard bank
on his back he gave himself to the sloping rock,
that walls one of the sides of the next ditch.
Water never ran so fast through a millrace
to turn the wheel of a land-mill,
when it approaches closest to the paddles,
as my master down that slope,
carrying me upon his breast,
like his son, not like a companion.
Scarcely were his feet arrived at the bed
of the bottom below, than they were on the ridge
above us; but there was no fear of them there:
for the high providence that willed them to be
ministers of the fifth ditch,
takes from them all the power to depart from there.
Down there we found a painted people
who went around with very slow steps,
weeping and in appearance tired and defeated.
They had capes with low hoods
before their eyes, made in the cut
that is made for the monks in Cluny.
On the outside they are gilded, so that they dazzle;
but inside all lead, and so heavy,
that Frederick would have put his of straw.
Oh eternally wearisome mantle!
We turned again, still to the left hand,
with them together, intent on the sad lament;
but because of the weight that weary people
came so slowly, that we were new
in company at every moving of a hip.
So that I to my guide: "See that you find
someone who by deed or name may be known,
and, as you walk, move your eyes about."
And one who understood the Tuscan speech,
cried out from behind us: "Hold your feet,
you who run so through the dusky air!
Perhaps you will have from me what you ask."
At which my guide turned and said: "Wait,
and then proceed according to his pace."
I stopped, and saw two show great haste
of the spirit, with their face, to be with me;
but the burden and the narrow path slowed them.
When they had arrived, with a long, sidelong stare
they gazed at me without a word;
then they turned to each other, and said to one another:
"This one seems alive by the action of his throat;
and if they are dead, by what privilege
do they go uncovered by the heavy stole?"
Then they said to me: "O Tuscan, who to the college
of the sad hypocrites have come,
do not disdain to say who you are."
And I to them: "I was born and grew up
on the fair river Arno in the great city,
and I am with the body I have always had.
But who are you, from whom so much sorrow distills,
as I see, down along your cheeks?
and what penalty is on you that so glitters?"
And one replied to me: "The orange-yellow capes
are of lead so thick, that the weights
make their scales creak so.
Jovial Friars we were, and Bolognese;
I Catalano and this one Loderingo
named, and by your city taken together
as a single man is usually taken,
to preserve its peace; and we were such,
that it still appears around the Gardingo."
I began: “O friars, your evils . . . ”;
but said no more, for to my eye there rushed
one, crucified on the ground with three stakes.
When he saw me, he contorted himself all over,
puffing into his beard with sighs;
and friar Catalano, who took note of this,
said to me: “That one transfixed whom you gaze upon,
counseled the Pharisees that it was expedient
to put one man to martyrdom for the people.
He is stretched crosswise, naked, on the path,
as you see, and it is necessary that he feel
whoever passes, how much he weighs, first.
And in such a way his father-in-law is tormented
in this ditch, and the others of the council
that was for the Jews an evil seed.”
Then I saw Virgil marvel
over him who was stretched out on a cross
so vilely in the eternal exile.
Then he directed to the friar such a voice:
“May it not displease you, if you are allowed, to tell us
if on the right hand lies any passage
by which we both can get ourselves out,
without compelling some of the black angels
to come from this bottom to lead us away.”
He replied then: “Nearer than you hope
approaches a rock-bridge that from the great circle
moves and crosses all the savage valleys,
except that in this one it is broken and does not cover it;
you will be able to climb up by the ruin,
which lies on the bank and piles up on the bottom.”
The leader stood a little while with his head bowed;
then said: “He told the business badly,
he who hooks the sinners over there.”
And the friar: “I once heard it said in Bologna
of the devil's many vices, among which I heard
that he is a liar, and the father of lies.”
Afterward the leader with great strides went away,
a little troubled with anger in his expression;
wherefore I from the burdened ones departed,
following the tracks of the dear feet.
