In that part of the young year
when the sun tempers its locks under Aquarius
and the nights already go toward the half-day,
when the hoarfrost on the ground imitates
the image of its white sister,
but the temper of its pen lasts little time,
the little peasant whose provisions are lacking,
gets up, and looks, and sees the countryside
all whitened; at which he strikes his hip,
returns to the house, and here and there complains,
like the wretch who does not know what to do;
then he returns, and regains his hope,
seeing the world has changed its face
in a short while, and takes up his crook
and drives his little sheep outside to pasture.
Thus the master made me despondent
when I saw his brow so troubled,
and so quickly to the hurt came the plaster;
for, when we came to the ruined bridge,
the leader turned to me with that sweet look
that I saw first at the foot of the mountain.
He opened his arms, after some deliberation
chosen within himself, first studying
the ruin well, and took hold of me.
And like one who works and estimates,
who always seems to provide for what is ahead,
so, lifting me up toward the top
of a great rock, he would spy another crag,
saying: "On that one next you must grip;
but test it first to see if it will hold you."
It was no path for one dressed in a cloak,
for we with difficulty, he light and I pushed,
could climb up from crag to crag.
And if it were not that on that side
the bank was shorter than on the other,
I know not of him, but I would have been beaten.
But because Malebolge toward the gate
of the lowest well all slopes,
the site of each valley brings it about
that one bank rises and the other descends;
we came at last to the point
from which the last stone breaks away.
The breath was so milked from my lungs
when I was up, that I could go no farther,
and so I sat down on my first arrival.
«Now you must cast off such sloth,»
said the master; «for, sitting on feathers,
one does not come to fame, nor under covers;
without which he who consumes his life,
leaves such a trace of himself on earth,
as smoke in air and in water foam.
And therefore get up; conquer your weariness
with the spirit that wins every battle,
if with its heavy body it does not sink.
A longer ladder must now be climbed;
it is not enough to have departed from these.
If you understand me, now act so that it helps you».
I rose then, showing myself supplied
with more breath than I felt I had,
and said: «Go, for I am strong and bold».
Up along the rock we took the way,
which was rugged, narrow, and difficult,
and much steeper than the one before.
I went along speaking so as not to seem faint;
whence a voice came out of the next ditch,
unsuitable for forming words.
I do not know what it said, although on the crest
I was already of the arch that crosses there;
but he who spoke seemed moved to anger.
I was turned downward, but my living eyes
could not go to the bottom through the dark;
wherefore I: «Master, see that you arrive
at the other bank and let us dismount the wall;
for, as I hear from here and do not understand,
so I see below and make nothing out».
«Other answer,» he said, «I do not give you
except the doing; for an honest request
should be followed by the deed in silence».
We descended the bridge from its head
where it joins with the eighth bank,
and then the pouch was manifest to me:
and I saw within it a terrible swarm
of serpents, and of such a diverse kind
that the memory still despoils my blood.
Let Libya with its sand no longer boast;
for if chelydri, jaculi, and phareae
it produces, and cenchres with amphisbaena,
neither so many pests nor so malignant
did it ever show, with all of Ethiopia
nor with that which is above the Red Sea.
Among this cruel and most sad abundance
ran people naked and terrified,
without hope of a hiding place or heliotrope:
with serpents their hands were bound behind them;
these thrust through their loins the tail
and the head, and were knotted in front.
And behold, at one who was on our bank,
a serpent lunged that transfixed him
there where the neck is knotted to the shoulders.
Neither O so quickly was ever nor I written,
as he took fire and burned, and all to ashes
it was fitting that falling he should become;
and after he was on the ground so destroyed,
the dust gathered itself together by itself
and into that same one returned straightway.
Thus by the great sages it is confessed
that the phoenix dies and then is born again,
when it nears its five-hundredth year;
grass nor grain in its life it does not feed on,
but only on tears of incense and of amomum,
and nard and myrrh are its last swaddling-bands.
And as is he who falls, and knows not how,
by force of a demon that drags him to earth,
or of some other seizure that binds a man,
when he rises, that around him he stares
all bewildered by the great anguish
that he has suffered, and looking about him sighs:
such was the sinner having risen then.
Oh power of God, how severe it is,
that strikes such blows for vengeance!
My leader then asked him who he was;
for which he answered: “I rained down from Tuscany,
a short time ago, into this fierce gorge.
A bestial life pleased me, and not a human one,
like the mule that I was; I am Vanni Fucci
the beast, and Pistoia was my worthy den.”
And I to my leader: “Tell him not to slink away,
and ask what sin thrust him down here;
for I saw him as a man of blood and of rage.”
And the sinner, who heard, did not dissemble,
but turned toward me his mind and his face,
and was painted with a sad shame;
then he said: “It grieves me more that you have caught me
in the misery where you see me,
than when I was taken from the other life.
I cannot deny what you ask;
I am sent so far down because I was
a thief in the sacristy of the fine furnishings,
and it was falsely once blamed on another.
But so that you may not rejoice at this sight,
if ever you get out of these dark places,
open your ears to my announcement, and hear.
Pistoia first purges itself of the Blacks;
then Florence renews its people and its ways.
Mars draws a vapor from Val di Magra
which is wrapped in turbulent clouds;
and with an impetuous and bitter storm
the battle over Campo Piceno will be fought;
from which he will suddenly shatter the fog,
so that every White will be wounded by it.
And I have said this so that it must grieve you!”
