At the end of his words the thief
raised his hands with both the figs,
shouting: “Take them, God, for at you I square them!”
From then on the snakes were my friends,
because one then coiled around his neck,
as if to say ‘I don’t want you to say more’;
and another on his arms, and bound him again,
riveting itself so in front of him,
that he could not make a single twitch with them.
Ah Pistoia, Pistoia, why do you not resolve
to turn yourself to ash so you endure no more,
since in doing evil you surpass your seed?
Through all the dark circles of Hell
I saw no spirit so proud against God,
not he who fell at Thebes down from the walls.
He fled so that he spoke no more a word;
and I saw a centaur full of rage
come shouting: “Where is he, where is the bitter one?”
Maremma, I do not believe, has so many
as the snakes he had upon his croup
up to where our human features begin.
Upon his shoulders, behind the nape,
with open wings there lay a dragon;
and it sets on fire whoever it runs up against.
My master said: “This is Cacus,
who, beneath the rock of Mount Aventine,
often made a lake of blood.
He does not go with his brothers on one path,
for the fraudulent theft he committed
of the great herd that he had nearby;
for which his crooked deeds ceased
under the club of Hercules, who perhaps
gave him a hundred blows, and he did not feel ten.”
While he was thus speaking, and he ran on,
and three spirits came up underneath us,
of whom neither I nor my duke was aware,
except when they cried out: “Who are you?”;
for which our new tale was stayed,
and we then turned our attention only to them.
I did not know them; but it came to pass,
as it is wont to come to pass by some chance,
that one had occasion to name another,
saying: “Cianfa, where has he been left?”;
wherefore I, so that the duke might be attentive,
placed my finger up from my chin to my nose.
If you are now, reader, slow to believe
what I shall say, it will be no wonder,
for I who saw it, can scarcely grant it to myself.
As I held my brows raised toward them,
a serpent with six feet throws itself
in front of one, and clings all over him.
With its middle feet it clasped his belly
and with its forefeet it seized his arms;
then it bit him on one cheek and the other;
its hind feet it stretched out along his thighs,
and put its tail between the two of them
and drew it up behind along his loins.
Ivy was never so rooted
to a tree, as the horrendous beast
entwined its own limbs through the other’s.
Then they stuck together, as if they had been
of hot wax, and mixed their color,
neither the one nor the other now seemed what it was:
as, up a papyrus, a brown color
proceeds before the flame’s heat,
that is not yet black, and the white dies.
The other two were looking on, and each one
cried: “Oh me, Agnel, how you are changing!
See, you are already neither two nor one.”
Now the two heads had become one,
when there appeared to us two figures mixed
in a single face, where two were lost.
The arms became two from the four strips;
the thighs with the legs, and the belly and the chest
became limbs that had never been seen.
Every former aspect there was annulled:
two and none the perverse image
seemed; and so, with a slow step, it went away.
As the lizard under the great scourge
of the dog days, changing from hedge to hedge,
seems a lightning flash if it crosses the path,
so there appeared, coming toward the bellies
of the other two, a little serpent inflamed,
livid and black as a grain of pepper;
and that part whence our first nourishment
is taken, it pierced in one of them;
then it fell down before him, stretched out.
The pierced one looked at it, but said nothing;
rather, with his feet motionless, he yawned
just as if sleep or fever had assailed him.
It, the serpent, and he, the man, stared at each other;
the one through the wound and the other through the mouth
smoked heavily, and the smoke collided.
Let Lucan now be silent where he tells
of wretched Sabellus and of Nasidius,
and wait to hear what is now shot forth.
Let Ovid be silent of Cadmus and Arethusa,
for if, in his poetry, he turns him to a serpent and her to a fountain,
I do not envy him;
for two natures, face to face, he never
so transmuted that both their forms
were ready to exchange their substance.
Together they responded to such rules,
that the serpent split its tail into a fork,
and the wounded one pressed his footprints together.
The legs with the thighs themselves
clung so together, that in a short time the joining
showed no sign at all that was apparent.
The cloven tail was taking on the shape
that was being lost there, and its skin
was becoming soft, and the other's hard.
I saw the arms draw into the armpits,
and the two feet of the beast, which were short,
lengthen as much as those were shortening.
Then the hind feet, twisted together,
became the member that man conceals,
and the wretch from his own had brought forth two.
While the smoke veils the one and the other
with a new color, and generates hair
on the one part and from the other strips it,
the one rose up and the other fell down,
not turning, however, the wicked lamps,
under which each was changing his muzzle.
The one that was upright drew it toward his temples,
and from the excess matter that came there,
ears emerged from the smooth cheeks;
that which did not run back and was retained
of that surplus, made a nose for the face
and thickened the lips as was fitting.
The one that lay prone thrusts its muzzle forward,
and draws its ears back into its head
as a snail does its horns;
and the tongue, which it had whole and ready
before to speak, splits, and the forked one
in the other closes up; and the smoke ceases.
The soul that had become a beast,
hissing, flees through the valley,
and the other, speaking, spits after him.
Then he turned his new shoulders to it,
and said to the other: «I want Buoso to run,
as I have done, on all fours along this path».
Thus I saw the seventh ballast
change and transmute; and here may the novelty excuse me
if the pen somewhat falters.
And though my eyes were somewhat confused
and my mind bewildered,
they could not flee so secretly
that I did not well make out Puccio Sciancato;
and it was he who alone, of the three companions
who came first, was not changed;
the other was he for whom you, Gaville, weep.
