Rejoice, Florence, since you are so great
that over sea and land you beat your wings,
and through Hell your name is spread abroad!
Among the thieves I found five such
of your citizens, for which shame comes to me,
and you do not rise in great honor from it.
But if near the morning one dreams of the true,
you will feel, in a short time from now,
what Prato, let alone others, craves for you.
And if it were already, it would not be too soon.
So may it be, since it must be!
For it will weigh on me more, the more I age.
We departed from there, and up the stairs
that the dark crags had made for us to descend before,
my leader climbed back up and drew me with him;
and pursuing the solitary path,
between the shards and rocks of the crag,
the foot without the hand could not get on.
Then I grieved, and now I grieve again
when I direct my mind to what I saw,
and I rein in my intellect more than I am wont,
so that it may not run where virtue does not guide it;
so that, if a good star or a better thing
has given me the good, I myself may not begrudge it.
As many as the peasant who rests on the hill,
in the season when he who brightens the world
keeps his face least hidden from us,
when the fly gives way to the mosquito,
sees fireflies down in the valley,
perhaps there where he harvests and he plows:
with so many flames the eighth bolgia was all glittering,
as I became aware
as soon as I was where the bottom appeared.
And as he who was avenged with the bears
saw Elijah's chariot at its departure,
when the horses rose erect to heaven,
that he could not follow it so with his eyes
that he saw anything but the flame alone,
like a little cloud, rising upward:
so each one moves along the throat
of the ditch, for none shows its theft,
and every flame steals away a sinner.
I was standing on the bridge, risen up to see,
so that if I had not taken hold of a rock,
I would have fallen down without being pushed.
And the leader, who saw me so intent,
said: “Within the fires are the spirits;
each one is swathed in that which sets him ablaze.”
“My master,” I replied, “from hearing you
I am more certain; but I had already supposed
that it was so, and I already wanted to say to you:
who is in that fire that comes so divided
at its top, that it seems to rise from the pyre
where Eteocles was put with his brother?”
He answered me: “There within are tormented
Ulysses and Diomedes, and so together
they go to vengeance as they went to wrath;
and within their flame is lamented
the ambush of the horse that made the gate
from which the noble seed of the Romans issued.
Wept for within is the artifice for which, dead,
Deidamia still grieves for Achilles,
and for the Palladium penalty is borne there.”
“If they can speak within those sparks,”
I said, “master, I earnestly pray you
and re-pray, that my prayer be worth a thousand,
that you do not make me a denial of waiting
until the horned flame comes here;
you see that with desire I bend toward it!”
And he to me: “Your prayer is worthy
of much praise, and therefore I accept it;
but make sure that your tongue holds itself back.
Leave the speaking to me, for I have conceived
what you want; for they would be scornful,
because they were Greeks, perhaps of your speech.”
After the flame had come there
where it seemed to my leader time and place,
in this form I heard him speak:
“O you who are two within one fire,
if I merited of you while I lived,
if I merited of you much or little
when in the world I wrote the high verses,
do not move on; but let one of you say
where, by him, he went lost to die.”
The greater horn of the ancient flame
began to shake itself, murmuring,
just like one that is labored by the wind;
then, moving the tip to and fro,
as if it were the tongue that was speaking,
it cast a voice forth and said: “When
I departed from Circe, who had detained
me more than a year there near Gaeta,
before Aeneas had so named it,
neither sweetness of a son, nor the piety
for my old father, nor the due love
which should have made Penelope happy,
could vanquish within me the ardor
that I had to become expert of the world,
and of human vices and of valor;
but I set forth upon the deep open sea
alone with one vessel and with that small
company by which I was not deserted.
One shore and the other I saw as far as Spain,
as far as Morocco, and the island of the Sardinians,
and the others that that sea bathes round about.
I and my companions were old and slow
when we came to that narrow strait
where Hercules marked out his boundaries
so that man should not put himself beyond;
on my right hand I left Seville,
on the other I had already left Ceuta.
‘O brothers,’ I said, ‘who through a hundred thousand
perils have reached the west,
to this so small vigil
of our senses that remains,
do not be willing to deny the experience,
following the sun, of the world without people.
Consider your origin:
you were not made to live like brutes,
but to follow virtue and knowledge.’
My companions I made so keen
for the journey with this little oration,
that then I would have hardly held them back;
and having turned our stern to the morning,
we made of the oars wings for the mad flight,
always gaining on the left-hand side.
All the stars of the other pole now
the night saw, and ours so low,
that it did not rise from the ocean floor.
Five times rekindled and as many times quenched
was the light from beneath the moon,
since we had entered into the high pass,
when there appeared to us a mountain, brown
because of the distance, and it seemed to me so high
as I had never seen any.
We rejoiced, and soon it turned to weeping;
for from the new land a whirlwind was born
and struck the forepart of the ship.
Three times it made it spin with all the waters;
at the fourth, it lifted the stern up
and the prow to go down, as it pleased Another,
until the sea was closed over us.”
