Already the flame was upright and quiet
to speak no more, and already it was going from us
with the sweet poet’s permission,
when another one, that came on behind it,
made us turn our eyes to its tip
for a confused sound that issued from it.
As the Sicilian bull that first bellowed
with the cry of him—and this was just—
who had tempered it with his file,
bellowed with the voice of the afflicted one,
so that, although it was of bronze,
it still seemed pierced through by the pain;
so, from having no way or outlet
at first in the fire, into its own language
the sorrowful words were converted.
But after they had found their path
up through the point, giving it that quiver
that the tongue had given them in their passage,
we heard it say: “O you to whom I direct
my voice and who just now were speaking Lombard,
saying ‘Now go your way, I vex you no more,’
though I have perhaps arrived a little late,
let it not displease you to stay and speak with me;
you see it does not displease me, and I burn!
If you but now into this blind world
have fallen from that sweet Latin land
from which I bring all of my guilt,
tell me if the Romagnols have peace or war;
for I was from the mountains there between Urbino
and the peak from which the Tiber is unsealed.”
I was still below, attentive and bent over,
when my duke touched me on the side,
saying: “You speak; this one is Latin.”
And I, who had my answer ready now,
without delay began to speak:
“O soul who are hidden down there below,
your Romagna is not, and never was,
without war in the hearts of its tyrants;
but I left no open war there when I came.
Ravenna stands as it has stood for many years:
the eagle of Polenta broods over it,
so that it covers Cervia with its pinions.
The land that once endured the long trial
and made of the French a bloody heap,
finds itself again beneath the green claws.
And the old mastiff and the new one from Verrucchio,
who made bad government of Montagna,
there where they are accustomed, make an auger of their teeth.
The cities of the Lamone and the Santerno
the young lion from the white nest leads,
who changes party from summer to winter.
And that city which the Savio bathes on its flank,
just as it sits between the plain and the mountain,
lives between tyranny and a free state.
Now who you are, I pray you, tell us;
be no more harsh than another has been,
so may your name in the world hold its own.”
After the fire had roared a while
in its own way, it moved its sharp tip
here and there, and then gave forth such a breath:
“If I believed that my reply were
to a person who would ever return to the world,
this flame would stay without more shaking;
but since never from this depth
did anyone alive return, if what I hear is true,
without fear of infamy I answer you.
I was a man of arms, and then a cord-wearer,
believing, so girded, to make amends;
and surely my belief would have come whole,
were it not for the great priest, may ill befall him!,
who put me back into my first sins;
and how and why, I want you to hear from me.
While I was the form of bones and pulp
that my mother gave me, my deeds
were not those of a lion, but of a fox.
The cunning stratagems and the covert ways
I knew them all, and so plied their art,
that to the ends of the earth the sound went out.
When I saw myself arrived at that part
of my age where everyone should
lower the sails and gather in the ropes,
that which pleased me before, then grieved me,
and repentant and confessed I gave myself up;
ah, wretched me! and it would have availed.
The prince of the new Pharisees,
waging war near the Lateran,
and not with Saracens nor with Jews,
for each of his enemies was a Christian,
and none had been at the conquest of Acre
nor a merchant in the land of the Sultan;
neither his high office nor sacred orders
did he regard in himself, nor in me that cord
that used to make its wearers leaner.
But as Constantine sought Sylvester
within Soracte to be cured of his leprosy,
so this one sought me for a master
to cure his proud fever;
he asked me for counsel, and I was silent
because his words seemed drunken.
And then he said again: “Let not your heart suspect;
I absolve you now, and you teach me how
to cast Penestrino to the ground.
The heavens I can lock and unlock,
as you know; for the keys are two
that my predecessor did not hold dear”.
Then the grave arguments pushed me
to where silence seemed to me the worse course,
and I said: “Father, since you wash me
of that sin into which I must now fall,
a long promise with a short keeping
will make you triumph in your high seat”.
Francis came then, when I was dead,
for me; but one of the black cherubim
said to him: “Do not take him; do not wrong me.
He must come down among my minions
because he gave the fraudulent counsel,
for which I have been at his hair ever since;
for one cannot be absolved who does not repent,
nor can one repent and will at once,
because of the contradiction that does not permit it”.
Oh wretched me! how I was startled
when he took me, saying: “Perhaps
you did not think I was a logician!”.
To Minos he brought me; and he twisted
his tail eight times around his hard back;
and after he had bitten it in great rage,
he said: “This one is for the thieves of the stolen fire”;
for which I am lost here where you see me,
and so clothed, going along, I lament».
When he had thus completed his speech,
the flame, grieving, departed,
twisting and shaking its sharp horn.
We passed on, I and my duke,
up the ridge onto the other arch
that covers the ditch where the penalty is paid
by those who, sowing discord, acquire a burden.
