Who could ever, even with words unbound,
tell of the blood and of the wounds in full
that I now saw, though telling it many times?
Every tongue for certain would come short
because of our speech and of our mind,
which have too little room to comprehend so much.
If all the people were gathered together again
who once, upon the fated land
of Puglia, lamented for their blood
shed by the Trojans and because of the long war
that made of the rings such a high spoil,
as Livy writes, who does not err,
with those who felt the pain of blows
for opposing Robert Guiscard;
and the other whose bones are still collected
at Ceprano, there where every Apulian
was a traitor, and there at Tagliacozzo,
where without arms old Alardo won;
and if some showed their limbs pierced and some lopped,
it would be nothing to equal
the foul fashion of the ninth ditch.
A cask, by losing a middle or side stave,
is not split open as I saw one,
ripped from the chin to where one expels filth.
Between his legs the entrails were hanging;
the pluck was visible and the sad sack
that makes shit of what is swallowed.
While I was all intent on seeing him,
he looked at me and with his hands opened his breast,
saying: "Now see how I rip myself apart!
see how maimed is Muhammad!
Weeping before me goes Ali,
cleft in the face from the chin to the forelock.
And all the others that you see here,
were sowers of scandal and of schism
when they were alive, and so they are cleft thus.
A devil is here behind who trims us up
so cruelly, putting to the sword's edge
each one of this company again,
when we have circled the sorrowful road;
because the wounds are closed up again
before one passes before him again.
But who are you who muses on the ridge,
perhaps to delay going to the punishment
that is adjudged upon your own accusations?".
"Neither death has reached him yet, nor does guilt lead him,"
answered my master, "to his torment;
but to give him full experience,
it falls to me, who am dead, to lead him
through Hell down here from circle to circle;
and this is as true as that I speak to you".
More than a hundred there were who, when they heard him,
stopped in the ditch to gaze at me
through wonder, forgetting their martyrdom.
"Now then, tell Fra Dolcino to arm himself,
you who perhaps will see the sun shortly,
if he does not wish to follow me here soon,
so with provisions, that the grip of snow
may not bring victory to the Novarese,
which otherwise would not be easy to achieve".
After he had raised one foot to leave,
Muhammad said this word to me;
then to depart he stretched it to the ground.
Another, who had his throat pierced
and his nose cut off up to his eyebrows,
and had but a single ear,
having stopped to look in wonder
with the others, before the others opened his windpipe,
which on the outside was red all over,
and said: “O you whom guilt does not condemn
and whom I saw above on Latin land,
if too much likeness does not deceive me,
remember Pier da Medicina,
if ever you return to see the sweet plain
that from Vercelli to Marcabò slopes down.
And make it known to the two best men of Fano,
to messer Guido and also to Angiolello,
that, if the foresight here is not in vain,
they will be cast from their vessel
and drowned in sacks near la Cattolica
through the betrayal of a fell tyrant.
Between the isle of Cyprus and of Majorca
Neptune never saw so great a crime,
not by pirates, not by Argolic people.
That traitor who sees with but one eye,
and holds the land that one here with me
would wish he had been fasting from the sight of,
will have them come to a parley with him;
then will so act, that for the wind of Focara
they will have no need of vow or prayer.”
And I to him: “Show me and declare,
if you wish me to carry news of you above,
who is the one of the bitter sight.”
Then he placed his hand on the jaw
of a companion of his and opened his mouth,
shouting: “This is he, and he does not speak.
This man, when exiled, submerged the doubt
in Caesar, affirming that the one prepared
always suffered from delay with harm.”
Oh how dismayed he seemed to me,
with his tongue cut in his gullet,
Curio, who was so bold in speech!
And one who had both his hands lopped off,
raising the stumps through the dusky air,
so that the blood made his face filthy,
shouted: 'You will remember Mosca, too,
who said, alas!, "A thing done has a head,"
which was an evil seed for the Tuscan people.'
And I added to him: 'And death to your clan';
wherefore he, heaping sorrow on sorrow,
went off like a person sad and mad.
But I remained to gaze upon the troop,
and saw a thing that I would be afraid,
without more proof, to tell of by myself;
were it not that conscience reassures me,
that good companion which emboldens a man
beneath the hauberk of feeling itself pure.
I surely saw, and it still seems that I see it,
a trunk without a head go on just as
the others of the sad flock were going;
and the severed head it held by the hair,
dangling from its hand in the guise of a lantern:
and it looked at us and said: 'Oh me!'.
Of itself it made a lantern for itself,
and they were two in one and one in two;
how it can be, He knows who so ordains.
When it was right at the foot of the bridge,
it raised its arm high with the whole head
to bring its words closer to us,
which were: 'Now see the grievous penalty,
you who, breathing, go seeing the dead:
see if any is as great as this.
And so that you may carry news of me,
know that I am Bertrand de Born, the one
who gave the young king the evil counsels.
I made the father and the son rebels to each other;
Ahithophel did no more with Absalom
and David with his wicked urgings.
Because I parted persons so joined,
I carry my brain parted, alas!,
from its beginning which is in this trunk.
Thus is the contrapasso observed in me.'
