The many people and the diverse wounds
had so inebriated my eyes,
that they were eager to stay and weep.
But Virgil said to me: “Why do you still gaze?
why does your sight still linger
down there among the sad, mangled shades?
You have not done so in the other pouches;
think, if you believe you can count them,
that the valley circles for twenty-two miles.
And already the moon is beneath our feet;
the time is now short that is granted to us,
and there is more to see than what you see.”
“If you had,” I then replied,
“attended to the reason for which I was looking,
perhaps you would have yet permitted me to stay.”
The guide was starting to leave, and I was going behind him,
already making my reply,
and adding: “Within that hollow
where I just now held my eyes so fixed,
I believe a spirit of my blood laments
the sin that costs so much down there.”
Then the master said: “Let not be broken
your thought from now on over him.
Attend to something else, and let him remain there;
for I saw him at the foot of the little bridge
pointing at you and threatening fiercely with his finger,
and I heard him named Geri del Bello.
You were then so completely impeded
by him who once held Altaforte,
that you did not look that way, so he departed.”
“O my duke, the violent death
which is not yet avenged for him,” I said,
“by anyone who is a consort of the shame,
made him disdainful; whence he went away
without speaking to me, as I judge:
and in this he has made me more pious toward him.”
Thus we spoke up to the first place
that from the cliff shows the other valley,
if there were more light, to its very bottom.
When we were above the last cloister
of Malebolge, so that its inhabitants
could appear to our sight,
diverse laments shot at me,
which had their arrows barbed with pity;
wherefore I covered my ears with my hands.
What sorrow it would be, if from the hospitals
of Valdichiana between July and September
and of Maremma and of Sardinia the sick
were all together in one ditch,
such it was here, and such a stench came from it
as is wont to come from rotted limbs.
We descended onto the last bank
of the long cliff, still on the left hand;
and then my sight was more alive
down toward the bottom, there where the minister
of the high Lord, infallible justice,
punishes the falsifiers whom she registers here.
I do not believe that to see greater sadness
was in Aegina the whole populace sick,
when the air was so full of malice,
that the animals, down to the little worm,
all fell, and then the ancient people,
according to what the poets hold for certain,
were restored from the seed of ants;
than it was to see through that dark valley
the spirits languishing in diverse heaps.
One on its belly and one on the shoulders
of another lay, and one on all fours
moved itself along the sad path.
Step by step we went without a word,
watching and listening to the sick ones,
who could not lift their persons.
I saw two sitting propped against each other,
as pan is propped on pan to be heated,
spotted from head to foot with scabs;
and I never saw a currycomb plied
by a stable-boy awaited by his master,
nor by one who unwillingly keeps watch,
as each one often plied the bite
of his nails upon himself for the great rage
of the itching, which has no other help;
and so the nails dragged down the scabs,
as a knife does the scales of a shad
or of another fish that has them larger.
«O you who with your fingers dismantle yourself»,
began my leader to one of them,
«and who make of them sometimes pincers,
tell us if any Italian is among these
who are here within, if your nail suffices
eternally for that work».
«Italians are we, whom you see so ravaged
here both of us», one answered weeping;
«but who are you who asked about us?».
And the leader said: «I am one who descends
with this living man down from ledge to ledge,
and I intend to show him Hell».
Then their common propping broke;
and trembling each one turned to me
with others who heard it on the rebound.
The good master drew all near to me,
saying: «Tell them what you wish»;
and I began, since he willed it:
«So may your memory not be stolen
in the first world from human minds,
but may it live under many suns,
tell me who you are and of what people;
let not your foul and loathsome penalty
frighten you from revealing yourselves to me».
«I was from Arezzo, and Albero of Siena»,
answered one, «had me put to the fire;
but that for which I died does not bring me here.
True it is that I told him, speaking in jest:
“I would know how to raise myself through the air in flight”;
and he, who had desire and little sense,
wished that I should show him the art; and only
because I did not make him Daedalus, he had me
burned by one who held him as a son.
But to the last pouch of the ten
for the alchemy that I practiced in the world
Minos, who cannot err, condemned me».
And I said to the poet: 'Was there ever
a people so vain as the Sienese?
Certainly the French are not so by far!'.
Whereupon the other leper, who heard me,
replied to my speech: 'Except from them Stricca
who knew how to make temperate expenses,
and Niccolò who the rich custom
of the clove first discovered
in the garden where such seed takes root;
and except the company in which Caccia
d’Asciano squandered the vineyard and the great woods,
and the Abbagliato showed off his judgment.
But so you may know who so seconds you
against the Sienese, sharpen your eye toward me,
so that my face may answer you well:
you will see that I am the shade of Capocchio,
who falsified metals with alchemy;
and you must recall, if I eye you well,
how I was a good ape of nature'.
