In the time when Juno was enraged
for Semele against the Theban blood,
as she showed more than once,
Athamas became so insane,
that seeing his wife with two sons
coming burdened on either hand,
he cried: “Let us spread the nets, so that I may catch
the lioness and the cubs at the pass”;
and then he stretched his pitiless claws,
taking the one who was named Learchus,
and whirled him and dashed him against a rock;
and she drowned herself with her other burden.
And when fortune turned low
the height of the Trojans that dared all,
so that together with the kingdom the king was undone,
Hecuba, sad, miserable, and captive,
after she saw Polyxena dead,
and of her Polydorus on the shore
of the sea the grieving one became aware,
driven mad, she barked like a dog;
so much did grief twist her mind.
But neither Theban furies nor Trojan
were ever seen in anyone so cruel,
in stinging beasts, let alone human limbs,
as I saw in two pale and naked shades,
who, biting, ran in that way
that a pig does when let out of its sty.
One reached Capocchio, and on the knot
of his neck it sank its teeth, so that, dragging him,
it made his belly scrape the solid ground.
And the Aretine who remained, trembling,
said to me: “That goblin is Gianni Schicchi,
and he goes raging, mangling others thus.”
“Oh,” I said to him, “so may the other not fix
its teeth on your back, may it not be a chore for you
to say who it is, before it takes off from here.”
And he to me: “That is the ancient soul
of wicked Myrrha, who became
her father's lover, outside of rightful love.
She came to sin with him in this way,
falsifying herself in another's form,
just as the other one who goes off there, undertook,
to win the prize mare,
to falsify in himself Buoso Donati,
making a will and giving the will legal form.”
And after the two raging ones had passed,
on whom I had kept my eye,
I turned it to look at the other ill-born.
I saw one, shaped like a lute,
if only he had had the groin
cut off from that part which a man has forked.
The heavy dropsy, which so unpairs
the limbs with the humor it ill converts,
that the face does not match the paunch,
made him hold his lips apart
like the hectic man who, from thirst,
curls one toward his chin and the other upward.
“O you who are without any punishment,
and I know not why, in this wretched world,”
he said to us, “look and attend
to the misery of Master Adam;
I had, when alive, enough of what I wanted,
and now, alas!, I crave a drop of water.
The little streams that from the green hills
of Casentino run down into the Arno,
making their channels cool and moist,
are always before me, and not in vain,
for their image parches me far more
than the sickness by which my face is made gaunt.
The rigid justice that ransacks me
draws occasion from the place where I sinned
to make my sighs fly forth the more.
There is Romena, where I falsified
the alloy sealed with the Baptist;
for which I left my body burned up there.
But if I could see here the sad soul
of Guido or of Alessandro or of their brother,
I would not give the sight for Fonte Branda.
One is here within already, if the rabid
shades that go about speak true;
but what good is it to me, who have my limbs bound?
If I were only still so light
that in a hundred years I could move one inch,
I would have already set myself upon the path,
searching for him among this foul folk,
though it circles eleven miles,
and is no less than half a mile across.
Because of them I am in such a family;
they induced me to strike the florins
that had three carats of dross.”
And I to him: “Who are the two wretches
that steam like wet hands in winter,
lying close to your right-hand confines?”
“Here I found them—and since they have not turned—”
he answered, “when I rained into this ditch,
and I do not think they will move for all eternity.
One is the false woman who accused Joseph;
the other is the false Sinon, the Greek from Troy:
because of their high fever they give off such a stench.”
And one of them, who took it as an annoyance
perhaps at being named so obscurely,
struck him with his fist on the hard paunch.
It resounded as if it were a drum;
and Master Adam struck him on the face
with his arm, which seemed no less hard,
saying to him: “Although I am deprived
of movement by my heavy limbs,
I have my arm free for such a task.”
Whereupon he replied: “When you were going
to the fire, you did not have it so quick;
but had it so and more when you were minting.”
And the one with dropsy: “You speak truth in this:
but you were not so true a witness
there, when you were asked for the truth at Troy.”
“If I spoke false, and you falsified the coin,”
said Sinon; “and I am here for one fault,
and you for more than any other demon!”
“Remember the horse, you perjurer,”
replied the one who had the swollen paunch;
“and may it pain you that the whole world knows it!”
“And may the thirst that cracks your tongue be your pain,”
said the Greek, “and the rotten water
that heaps your belly like a hedge before your eyes!”
Then the coiner: “So does your mouth
gape to your own harm, as is its wont;
for if I have thirst, and humor stuffs me,
you have the burning fever and the aching head,
and to lick the mirror of Narcissus,
you would not need many words of invitation.”
I was completely fixed on listening to them,
when the master said to me: “Now just you look,
for it's by a little that I don't quarrel with you!”.
When I heard him speak to me with anger,
I turned toward him with such shame,
that it still revolves in my memory.
As is he who dreams of his own harm,
who while dreaming desires to be dreaming,
so that he yearns for what is, as if it were not,
such I became, unable to speak,
who wished to excuse myself, and was excusing
myself all the while, and did not think I was doing it.
“A greater fault is washed by lesser shame,”
said the master, “than yours has been;
therefore of all sadness unburden yourself.
And reckon that I am always at your side,
if it happens again that fortune receives you
where people are in a similar dispute:
for the wish to hear it is a base desire.”
