The same tongue first bit me,
so that it colored both one and the other cheek,
and then the medicine it offered me;
thus I have heard that the lance of Achilles
and of his father used to be the cause
first of a sad and then of a good gift.
We turned our back on the wretched little valley,
up along the bank that encircles it,
crossing without any speech.
Here it was less than night and less than day,
so that my sight went forward little;
but I heard a high horn sound,
so loud it would have made any thunder faint,
which, following its path back toward itself,
directed my eyes entirely to one place.
After the sorrowful rout, when
Charlemagne lost the holy enterprise,
Roland did not sound so terrible a blast.
A short while I held my head turned that way,
when I seemed to see many high towers;
so I: “Master, tell me, what city is this?”.
And he to me: “Because you traverse
through the shadows from too far off,
it happens that you then err in your imagining.
You will see well, if you arrive there,
how much the sense is deceived by distance;
therefore spur yourself on a little more.”
Then he took me lovingly by the hand
and said: “Before we go further,
so that the fact may seem less strange to you,
know that they are not towers, but giants,
and they are in the well around the bank
from the navel down, all of them.”
As when the fog dissipates,
the sight little by little re-forms
that which the vapor that crowds the air conceals,
so piercing the thick and dark air,
approaching more and more toward the bank,
my error fled from me and my fear grew;
for, as on its round rampart
Monteriggioni is crowned with towers,
so the bank that surrounds the well
was turreted with half their bodies
by the horrible giants, whom Jupiter
still threatens from heaven when he thunders.
And I could already make out the face of one,
the shoulders and the chest and a large part of the belly,
and down along the ribs both of the arms.
Nature, certainly, when she left off the art
of making such animals, did very well
to take away such executors from Mars.
And if of elephants and of whales
she does not repent, he who looks subtly
holds her for it more just and more discreet;
for where the argument of the mind
is added to ill will and to power,
no one can make any defense against it.
His face seemed to me long and large
as the pinecone of Saint Peter's in Rome,
and in proportion to it were the other bones;
so that the bank, which was a loincloth
from his middle down, showed so much of him
above, that to reach his hair
three Frisians would have made a bad boast;
because I saw thirty great palms of him
from the place down where a man buckles his cloak.
"Raphèl maì amècche zabì almi,"
began to cry the savage mouth,
for which no sweeter psalms were fitting.
And my leader to him: "Foolish soul,
keep to your horn, and with that vent yourself
when rage or other passion touches you!
Search at your neck, and you will find the strap
that keeps it tied, o confused soul,
and see how it crosses your great chest."
Then he said to me: "He accuses himself;
this is Nimrod, through whose evil thought
one single language is not used in the world.
Let us leave him be and not speak in vain;
for so to him is every language
as his is to others, which is known to no one."
We made then a longer journey,
turned to the left; and at a crossbow's shot
we found the next one, far more fierce and large.
To bind him, whoever was the master,
I cannot say, but he held girded
the left arm in front and the right arm behind him
with a chain that held him shackled
from the neck down, so that on the uncovered part
it wound itself down to the fifth coil.
"This proud one wished to test
his power against the highest Jove,"
said my leader, "whence he has such a reward.
Ephialtes is his name, and he made the great test
when the giants made the gods afraid;
the arms that he plied, he nevermore moves."
And I to him: "If it may be, I would wish
that of the immense Briareus
my eyes might have experience."
Whereupon he replied: "You will see Antaeus
near here, who speaks and is unbound,
who will place us in the bottom of all wickedness.
The one you want to see is much farther on,
and he is bound and made like this one,
except he seems more ferocious in the face."
Never was an earthquake so violent
that it shook a tower so strong,
as Ephialtes was quick to shake himself.
Then I feared death more than ever,
and there was no need for more than the fear,
if I had not seen the chains.
We proceeded further on then,
and came to Antaeus, who a good five ells,
without his head, emerged from the pit.
"O you who in the fortunate valley
that made Scipio heir to glory,
when Hannibal with his men turned his back,
once brought a thousand lions as prey,
and who, if you had been at the high war
of your brothers, it still seems to be believed
that the sons of the earth would have won:
set us down, and let it not disgust you,
where Cocytus locks in the cold.
Do not make us go to Tityus or to Typhon:
this one can give that which is longed for here;
therefore bend down and do not twist your snout.
He can yet restore your fame in the world,
for he lives, and still expects a long life
if grace does not call him to itself before his time."
Thus said the master; and he in haste
stretched out his hands, and took my guide,
from which Hercules once felt a great grip.
Virgil, when he felt himself being taken,
said to me: "Come here, so that I may take you";
then he made it so that he and I were one bundle.
As the Garisenda appears to one looking at it
from beneath the leaning side, when a cloud passes
over it so that it seems to lean the opposite way:
such seemed Antaeus to me, who was waiting
to see him bend, and it was such a moment
that I would have wished to go by another road.
But gently to the bottom that devours
Lucifer with Judas, he placed us;
nor, so bent, did he make a delay there,
and like a mast on a ship he raised himself up.
