If I had rhymes harsh and grating,
as would befit the sad hole
upon which all the other rocks converge,
I would press out the juice of my conception
more fully; but since I have them not,
not without fear I bring myself to speak;
for it is no enterprise to take in jest
to describe the bottom of the whole universe,
nor for a tongue that calls for mommy or daddy.
But may those ladies help my verse
who helped Amphion to enclose Thebes,
so that the telling may not be diverse from the fact.
O you above all ill-created rabble
who are in the place of which it is hard to speak,
better had you been here sheep or goats!
When we were down in the dark well
beneath the giant's feet, and much lower still,
and I was still gazing at the high wall,
I heard it said to me: "Watch how you pass:
go so that you do not tread with your soles
the heads of the wretched, weary brothers."
At which I turned, and saw before me
and beneath my feet a lake that from frost
had the semblance of glass and not of water.
Never for its course did the Danube in Austria make
so thick a veil in winter,
nor the Don there under the cold sky,
as there was here; for if Tambernicchi
had fallen upon it, or Pietrapana,
it would not have made a creak even at the edge.
And as the frog stays to croak
with its muzzle out of the water, when the peasant girl dreams
often of gleaning,
livid, up to where shame appears,
were the mournful shades in the ice,
setting their teeth to the note of a stork.
Each one held its face turned downward;
from the mouth the cold, and from the eyes the sad heart
procured their testimony among them.
When I had looked around me for a while,
I turned toward my feet, and saw two so tightly bound,
that the hair of their heads was mixed together.
"Tell me, you who press your chests together so,"
I said, "who are you?" And they bent their necks;
and after they had raised their faces to me,
their eyes, which before were only wet within,
dripped onto their lips, and the frost bound
the tears between them and locked their eyes shut again.
A clamp never fastened wood to wood
so strongly; at which they, like two he-goats,
butted together, such was the rage that seized them.
And one who had lost both his ears
to the cold, with his face still bowed down,
said: "Why do you stare so intently at us?
If you wish to know who these two are,
the valley from which the Bisenzio flows down
belonged to their father, Alberto, and to them.
They came from one body; and you can search all of Caina,
and you will not find a shade more worthy
to be fixed in gelatin:
not he whose breast and shadow were pierced
by a single blow from Arthur's hand;
not Focaccia; not this one who so obstructs my view
with his head that I can see no further,
and was named Sassol Mascheroni;
if you are Tuscan, you surely know who he was.
And so you do not make me speak more,
know that I was Camiscion de' Pazzi;
and I await Carlino to make me seem innocent."
Then I saw a thousand faces made dog-like
by the cold; which is why a shudder comes over me,
and always will, at the sight of frozen fords.
And while we were walking toward the center
to which all weight gathers,
and I was trembling in the eternal chill;
whether it was will or fate or fortune,
I do not know; but, walking among the heads,
I struck my foot hard against the face of one.
Weeping it screamed at me: “Why do you trample me?
If you do not come to increase the vengeance
of Montaperti, why do you molest me?”.
And I: “My Master, now wait for me here,
so that I may resolve a doubt by means of this one;
then you may make me hurry as much as you wish”.
The leader stood, and I said to that one
who was still blaspheming harshly:
“Who are you that you rebuke others so?”.
“Now who are you who go through Antenora,”
he answered, “striking the cheeks of others,
so that, if you were alive, it would be too much?”.
“I am alive, and it may be dear to you,”
was my reply, “if you ask for fame,
that I place your name among the other notes”.
And he to me: “For the contrary I have desire.
Get away from here and give me no more trouble,
for you know ill how to flatter in this icy sheet!”.
Then I seized him by the scruff of the neck
and said: “It will be needful that you name yourself,
or that no hair remain on you up here”.
At which he to me: “Even if you pull out all my hair,
I will neither tell you who I am, nor show you,
if you fall upon my head a thousand times”.
I already had his hair wrapped in my hand,
and had pulled out more than one lock of it,
he barking with his eyes kept cast down,
when another cried: “What is wrong with you, Bocca?
Is it not enough for you to chatter with your jaws,
without your barking? what devil is touching you?”.
“Now,” I said, “I do not want you to speak more,
wicked traitor; for to your shame
I will carry true news of you”.
“Go away,” he replied, “and tell what you will;
but do not be silent, if you get out of here,
of him who had his tongue so ready just now.
He weeps here for the silver of the French:
‘I saw,’ you can say, ‘that one from Duera
there where the sinners are kept in the cool.’
If you should be asked ‘Who else was there?’,
you have at your side the one from Beccheria
whose gorget Florence slit.
Gianni de’ Soldanier I believe is
farther on with Ganelon and Tebaldello,
who opened Faenza when it was sleeping”.
We had already departed from him,
when I saw two frozen in a single hole,
so that the one head to the other was a hat;
and as bread is devoured for hunger,
so the one on top set his teeth upon the other
there where the brain is joined with the nape:
not otherwise did Tydeus gnaw
the temples of Menalippus out of disdain,
than that one was doing to the skull and the other parts.
«O you who show by such a bestial sign
hatred for the one you are eating,
tell me the why,» I said, «on this condition:
that if you with reason complain of him,
knowing who you are and what his sin was,
in the world above I may yet repay you for it,
if that with which I speak does not dry up.»
