His mouth he lifted from the savage meal,
that sinner, wiping it on the hair
of the head that he had ravaged from behind.
Then he began: “You want me to renew
a desperate grief that presses on my heart
just thinking of it, before I even speak.
But if my words are to be the seed
that bears fruit of infamy for the traitor whom I gnaw,
you will see me speak and weep at the same time.
I do not know who you are nor by what means
you have come down here; but a Florentine
you truly seem to me when I hear you.
You must know that I was Count Ugolino,
and this is the Archbishop Ruggieri:
now I will tell you why I am such a neighbor.
That by the effect of his evil thoughts,
trusting in him, I was taken
and then put to death, there is no need to say;
but that which you cannot have heard,
that is, how cruel my death was,
you will hear, and you will know if he has wronged me.
A narrow slit within the Muda,
which because of me has the title of Hunger,
and in which others must yet be shut,
had shown me through its opening
several moons already, when I had the evil dream
that ripped for me the veil of the future.
This one seemed to me the master and lord,
chasing the wolf and its whelps toward the mountain
that prevents the Pisans from seeing Lucca.
With lean, eager, and well-trained hounds
Gualandi with Sismondi and with Lanfranchi
he had placed before him at the front.
After a short run they seemed to me weary,
the father and his sons, and with their sharp fangs
it seemed to me I saw their flanks being torn.
When I awoke before the morning,
I heard my sons crying in their sleep
who were with me, and asking for bread.
Truly you are cruel, if you do not grieve already
thinking of what my heart was foretelling;
and if you do not weep, at what do you usually weep?
They were already awake, and the hour was approaching
when food was usually brought to us,
and from his dream each one was afraid;
and I heard the door below being nailed shut
on the horrible tower; at which I looked
into my sons’ faces without making a sound.
I did not weep, I so turned to stone inside:
they were weeping; and my Anselmuccio
said: “You look so, father! what is wrong?”.
For that I did not weep, nor did I answer
all that day nor the night that followed,
until the next sun came out into the world.
When a little ray of light had entered
the sorrowful prison, and I perceived
in four faces my very own aspect,
I bit both my hands for grief;
and they, thinking that I did it from a desire
to eat, suddenly rose up
and said: “Father, it would be far less pain for us
if you eat of us: you clothed us in
this miserable flesh, and you may strip it off”.
I quieted myself then, not to make them sadder;
that day and the next we all remained mute;
ah, hard earth, why did you not open up?
After we had come to the fourth day,
Gaddo threw himself outstretched at my feet,
saying: “My father, why do you not help me?”.
There he died; and as you see me,
I saw the three fall one by one
between the fifth day and the sixth; at which I began,
already blind, to grope over each one,
and for two days I called them, after they were dead.
Then, more than grief, hunger had power.»
When he had said that, with eyes askew
he seized the wretched skull again with his teeth,
which were, to the bone, as strong as a dog’s.
Ah, Pisa, shame of the peoples
of the fair country where the ‘sì’ sounds,
since your neighbors are slow to punish you,
let Capraia and Gorgona move
and make a hedge for the Arno at its mouth,
so that it may drown every person in you!
For if Count Ugolino had the name
of having betrayed you of your castles,
you should not have put his sons to such a cross.
Their young age made them innocent,
O new Thebes, Uguiccione and Brigata
and the other two whom the canto names above.
We passed on, to where the frost
harshly binds another people,
not turned downward, but all thrown on their backs.
The weeping itself there does not let them weep,
and the grief that finds a block upon the eyes
turns inward to make the anguish grow;
for the first tears form a knot,
and like visors of crystal,
they fill up the whole socket beneath the brow.
And although, as if from a callus,
because of the cold every feeling
had ceased to have a place on my face,
it already seemed to me I felt some wind;
for which I: “My master, who moves this?
Is not every vapor extinguished down here?”.
At which he to me: “Soon you will be where
your eye will give you the answer to that,
by seeing the cause that rains down this blast”.
And one of the sad ones from the cold crust
cried out to us: "O cruel souls
so much that the last post is given to you,
lift from my face the hard veils,
so that I may vent the grief that impregnates my heart,
a little, before the weeping freezes again."
Wherefore I to him: "If you want me to help you,
tell me who you are, and if I do not relieve you,
may it be my lot to go to the bottom of the ice."
He answered then: "I am friar Alberigo;
I am he of the fruit of the evil garden,
who here receive a date for a fig."
"Oh," I said to him, "are you then already dead?"
And he to me: "How my body may stand
in the world above, I have no knowledge.
Such privilege has this Ptolemea,
that oftentimes the soul falls here
before Atropos gives it the push.
And so that you may more willingly scrape
the vitrified tears from my face,
know that, as soon as the soul betrays
as I did, its body is taken from it
by a demon, who then governs it
until its time is all turned.
It plummets into such a cistern;
and perhaps the body still appears above
of the shade that winters here behind me.
You must know it, if you are just now come down:
he is sir Branca Doria, and more years
have since passed that he was so enclosed."
"I believe," I said to him, "that you deceive me;
for Branca Doria has not died ever,
and eats and drinks and sleeps and wears clothes."
"In the ditch above," he said, "of the Malebranche,
there where the tenacious pitch boils,
Michel Zanche had not yet arrived,
when this one left the devil in his place
in his body, and a kinsman of his
who committed the treason together with him.
But now stretch forth your hand here;
open my eyes." And I did not open them for him;
and it was courtesy to be a villain to him.
Ah Genoese, men estranged
from every custom and full of all corruption,
why are you not scattered from the world?
For with the worst spirit of Romagna
I found one of you, such that for his deed
in soul already bathes in Cocytus,
and in body still seems alive above.
