«The banners of the king of Hell advance
toward us; therefore look ahead»,
said my master, «if you can discern him».
As when a thick fog breathes,
or when our hemisphere grows dark at night,
a windmill that the wind turns seems from afar,
such a structure I seemed to see then;
then because of the wind I drew back behind
my guide, for there was no other shelter.
I was now, and with fear I put it into meter,
there where the shades were all covered,
and showed through like a straw in glass.
Some are lying down; others stand erect,
this one with its head and that one with its soles;
another, like a bow, bends its face back to its feet.
When we had advanced so far forward,
that it pleased my master to show me
the creature that once had the beautiful semblance,
he took himself from before me and made me stop,
«Behold Dis,» saying, «and behold the place
where you must arm yourself with fortitude».
How I then became frozen and faint,
do not ask, reader, for I do not write it,
because all speech would be too little.
I did not die and I did not remain alive;
think now for yourself, if you have a grain of wit,
what I became, deprived of both the one and the other.
The emperor of the sorrowful kingdom
from mid-chest emerged from the ice;
and I am more in proportion with a giant
than giants are with his arms:
see now how great that whole must be
that corresponds to such a part.
If he was as beautiful as he is now ugly,
and against his maker raised his brows,
truly from him must all sorrow proceed.
Oh how great a marvel it appeared to me
when I saw three faces on his head!
The one in front, and it was vermilion;
the others were two, which joined this one
above the middle of each shoulder,
and they joined at the place of the crest:
and the right one seemed between white and yellow;
the left one to see was of the kind
of those who come from where the Nile descends.
Beneath each, two great wings came forth,
as was fitting for so great a bird:
sails of the sea I never saw so great.
They had no feathers, but of a bat
was their form; and he was flapping them,
so that three winds moved out from him:
from this all of Cocytus was frozen.
With six eyes he was weeping, and down three chins
dripped the tears and bloody slobber.
From each mouth he was tearing with his teeth
a sinner, in the manner of a heckle,
so that he made three of them suffer so.
To the one in front the biting was nothing
compared to the scratching, for at times his back
remained completely stripped of skin.
“That soul up there who has the greatest pain,”
said the master, “is Judas Iscariot,
who has his head inside, and plies his legs without.
Of the other two who have their heads below,
the one who hangs from the black maw is Brutus:
see how he writhes, and utters not a word!;
and the other is Cassius, who seems so large-limbed.
«But the night is rising again, and now
it is time to depart, for we have seen all».
As it pleased him, I clasped his neck;
and he seized the opportune time and place,
and when the wings were opened wide enough,
he grappled himself to the hairy flanks;
from shag to shag he then descended down
between the thick fur and the frozen crusts.
When we were there where the thigh
turns, just at the thick of the haunch,
the leader, with labor and with anguish,
turned his head where he had had his shanks,
and grappled the hair like a man who climbs,
so that I thought I was returning into Hell again.
«Hold on fast, for by such stairs»,
said the master, panting like a weary man,
«must one depart from so much evil».
Then he came out through the opening of a rock
and placed me on its edge to sit;
next he directed his skillful step toward me.
I raised my eyes and thought I would see
Lucifer as I had left him,
and I saw him holding his legs upward;
and if I then became bewildered,
let the dull people ponder it, who do not see
what that point is which I had passed.
«Get up,» said the master, «on your feet:
the way is long and the path is evil,
and already the sun returns to mid-terce.»
It was no palace passageway
where we were, but a natural dungeon
that had a bad floor and a lack of light.
«Before I tear myself from the abyss,
my master,» I said when I was upright,
«speak to me a little to draw me from error:
where is the ice? and this one, how is he fixed
so upside-down? and how, in so little time,
has the sun made the journey from evening to morning?».
And he to me: «You imagine you are still
on the other side of the center, where I took hold
of the hair of the guilty worm who pierces the world.
You were on that side for as long as I descended;
when I turned, you passed the point
to which all weights from every part are drawn.
And you are now arrived beneath the hemisphere
that is opposite to the one that the great dry land
covers, and under whose summit was consumed
the man who was born and lived without sin;
you have your feet on a small sphere
that makes the other face of the Judecca.
Here it is morning, when there it is evening;
and this one, who made a ladder for us with his hair,
is fixed still just as he was before.
On this side he fell down from heaven;
and the land, which before spread out on this side,
for fear of him made a veil of the sea,
and came to our hemisphere; and perhaps
to flee from him, it left this empty place here,
that which appears on this side, and rushed upward.»
There is a place down there, remote from Beelzebub
as far as his tomb extends,
which is known not by sight, but by the sound
of a little stream that descends there
through the hollow of a rock, which it has eroded,
with the course that it winds, and slopes but little.
My leader and I, by that hidden way,
entered to return into the bright world;
and without any care of taking any rest,
we climbed up, he first and I second,
so far that I saw some of the beautiful things
that heaven bears, through a round opening.
And thence we came forth to see again the stars.
