To run through better waters raises its sails
now the little boat of my wit,
that leaves behind it a sea so cruel;
and I will sing of that second kingdom
where the human spirit is purged
and becomes worthy of ascending to heaven.
But here let dead poetry rise again,
O holy Muses, since I am yours;
and here let Calliope rise somewhat,
accompanying my song with that sound
of which the miserable Magpies felt
the blow so great, that they despaired of pardon.
Sweet color of oriental sapphire,
that was gathering in the serene aspect
of the medium, pure up to the first circle,
to my eyes began again to give delight,
as soon as I came out of the dead air
that had saddened my eyes and my breast.
The beautiful planet that comforts to love
was making the whole east to smile,
veiling the Fishes that were in its escort.
I turned me to the right hand, and set my mind
on the other pole, and I saw four stars
never seen before save by the first people.
The heavens seemed to rejoice in their little flames:
O northern widowed site,
since you are deprived of gazing on them!
When I had parted from the sight of them,
turning me a little to the other pole,
there where the Wain had already disappeared,
I saw near me an old man, alone,
worthy of so much reverence in his appearance,
that no son owes more to a father.
A long beard mixed with white hair
he wore, similar to his own hair,
from which a double strand fell to his chest.
The rays of the four holy lights
so adorned his face with light,
that I saw him as if the sun were before him.
«Who are you who, against the blind river,
have fled the eternal prison?»,
he said, moving those venerable plumes.
«Who has guided you, or what was a lantern to you,
in coming out of the deep night
that always makes the infernal valley black?
Are the laws of the abyss so broken?
Or is a new counsel changed in heaven,
that you, the damned, come to my grottoes?».
My leader then took hold of me,
and with words and with hands and with signs
made me reverent in my knees and brow.
Then he answered him: «I did not come on my own:
a lady descended from heaven, for whose prayers
I came to this man's aid with my company.
But since it is your will that more be explained
of our condition as it truly is,
my will cannot be to deny it to you.
This man has never seen his final evening;
but through his folly he was so near it,
that very little time remained to turn.
As I said, I was sent to him
to save him; and there was no other way
than this one on which I have set myself.
I have shown him all the wicked people;
and now I intend to show those spirits
who purge themselves under your authority.
How I have drawn him forth would be long to tell you;
from on high a power descends that helps me
to lead him to see you and to hear you.
Now may it please you to welcome his coming:
he goes seeking liberty, which is so dear,
as he knows who for her sake refuses life.
You know it, for death was not bitter to you for her
in Utica, where you left
the garment that on the great day will be so bright.
The eternal edicts are not broken by us,
for this one lives and Minos does not bind me;
but I am from the circle where are the chaste eyes
of your Marcia, who in her look still prays you,
o holy breast, that you hold her as your own:
for her love, then, incline yourself to us.
Let us go on through your seven realms;
I will carry back thanks of you to her,
if you deign to be mentioned down there».
«Marcia so pleased my eyes
while I was over there,» he said then,
«that whatever graces she wanted from me, I did.
Now that she dwells beyond the evil river,
she can move me no more, by that law
which was made when I came out from there.
But if a lady from heaven moves and guides you,
as you say, there is no need for flattery:
it is enough that you request it for her.
Go then, and see that you gird this man
with a smooth reed and that you wash his face,
so that all filth may be wiped from it;
for it would not be fitting, with an eye clouded
by any mist, to go before the first
minister, who is of those from paradise.
This little island, around at its very base,
down there where the wave beats upon it,
bears reeds upon the soft mud:
no other plant that puts forth leaves
or grows rigid, can have life there,
because it does not yield to the buffeting.
Afterward, do not make your return this way;
the sun will show you, which is now rising,
how to take the mountain by an easier slope».
Thus he vanished; and I raised myself up
without speaking, and drew myself wholly
to my leader, and directed my eyes to him.
He began: "Son, follow my steps:
let us turn back, for from here slopes down
this plain to its low extremities."
The dawn was vanquishing the morning hour
that fled before it, so that from afar
I recognized the trembling of the sea.
We went along the solitary plain
like one who returns to the lost road,
who until he reaches it seems to go in vain.
When we were there where the dew
battles with the sun, for being in a place
where, in a breeze, it evaporates little,
both his hands upon the little grass spread out
gently my master placed:
wherefore I, who was aware of his art,
held toward him my tear-stained cheeks;
there he made wholly uncovered for me
that color which Hell had hidden from me.
We came then onto the deserted shore,
which never saw its waters navigated
by a man who of returning was later skilled.
Here he girded me as it pleased another:
oh wonder! for whichever he chose
of the humble plant, just such a one was reborn
suddenly there from where he plucked it.
