The sun had already reached the horizon
whose meridian circle covers
Jerusalem at its highest point;
and the night, which circles opposite to him,
was issuing forth from the Ganges with the Scales,
which fall from her hand when she overcomes;
so that the white and vermilion cheeks,
there where I was, of the beautiful Aurora
were turning orange through too much age.
We were still alongside the sea,
like people who think of their journey,
who go with the heart and with the body linger.
And behold, just as, surprised by morning,
through the thick vapors Mars glows red
down in the west over the sea’s floor,
such appeared to me, so may I see it again,
a light coming over the sea so swift
that its motion no flight could equal.
From which when I had withdrawn a little
my eye to question my leader,
I saw it again, made more shining and larger.
Then on each side of it appeared to me
a what-I-knew-not-white, and from below
little by little another came forth from it.
My master still made no utterance,
while the first white things appeared as wings;
then when he well recognized the boatman,
he cried: “Make, make your knees bend.
Behold the angel of God: fold your hands;
from now on you shall see such ministers.
See how he scorns human instruments,
so that he wants no oar, nor other sail
than his own wings, between shores so distant.
See how he holds them straight toward the sky,
plying the air with the eternal plumes,
which do not change like mortal hair.”
Then, as more and more toward us came
the divine bird, the brighter he appeared:
so that the eye close up could not sustain him,
but I bent it downward; and he came to shore
with a vessel so swift and so light,
that the water swallowed none of it.
At the stern stood the celestial helmsman,
such that to be described would make one blessed;
and more than a hundred spirits sat within.
“In exitu Isräel de Aegypto”
they all sang together with one voice
with all of that psalm that is written after.
Then he made for them the sign of the holy cross;
at which they all cast themselves upon the beach:
and he went away, as he had come, swift.
The throng that remained there, bewildered
seemed by the place, gazing all around
like one who tries out new things.
From all sides the day was being shot by the sun,
which with its ready arrows had
chased Capricorn from the midst of the sky,
when the new people raised their foreheads
toward us, saying to us: “If you know,
show us the way to go to the mountain.”
And Virgil answered: “You believe
perhaps that we are experts of this place;
but we are pilgrims just as you are.
Just now we came, a little before you,
by another way, that was so harsh and hard,
that the climbing now will seem a game to us.”
The souls, who became aware of me,
through my breathing, that I was still alive,
marveling, became pale.
And as to a messenger who carries an olive branch
the people draw near to hear the news,
and of crowding him no one shows himself shy,
so upon my face those souls fixed their gaze,
all of those fortunate souls,
almost forgetting to go and make themselves beautiful.
I saw one of them draw himself forward
to embrace me with such great affection,
that it moved me to do the same.
Ohi shades, empty except in appearance!
three times behind him I clasped my hands,
and as many times they returned to my breast.
With wonder, I believe, I was painted;
at which the shade smiled and drew back,
and I, following him, pushed myself forward.
Gently he said that I should pause;
then I knew who he was, and prayed
that, to speak with me, he would stop a little.
He answered me: «Just as I loved you
in the mortal body, so I love you freed:
therefore I stop; but you, why do you go?».
«My Casella, to return another time
to where I am, I make this journey»,
I said; «but for you, how has so much time been taken away?».
And he to me: «No outrage has been done to me,
if he who takes up when and whom he pleases
has many times denied me this passage;
for his will is made of a just will:
truly, for three months now he has taken
whoever has wished to enter, in total peace.
Whence I, who was now turned to the shore
where the water of the Tiber becomes salty,
was kindly gathered up by him.
To that mouth he has now set his wing straight,
because there are always gathered
those who do not sink down toward Acheron».
And I: «If a new law does not take from you
memory or practice of the loving song
that used to quiet all my sorrows,
with it may it please you to console somewhat
my soul, which, with its body,
coming here, is so weary!».
‘Love that in my mind discourses to me’
he then began so sweetly,
that the sweetness still sounds within me.
My master and I and those people
who were with him seemed so content,
as if nothing else touched anyone’s mind.
We were all transfixed and attentive
to his notes; and behold the venerable elder
shouting: “What is this, you laggard spirits?
what negligence, what tarrying is this?
Run to the mountain to strip off the slough
that does not let God be manifest to you.”
As when, gathering wheat or tares,
the doves assembled at their pasture,
quiet, without showing their accustomed pride,
if something appears of which they have fear,
suddenly they leave the food,
because they are assailed by a greater care;
so I saw that fresh-arrived band
leave the song, and flee toward the slope,
like one who goes, not knowing where he may emerge;
nor was our own departure less swift.
