Although the sudden flight
dispersed them across the plain,
turned toward the mountain where reason probes us,
I drew close to my faithful companion:
and how would I have run without him?
who would have drawn me up the mountain?
He seemed to me remorseful of himself:
o dignified and pure conscience,
how bitter a sting a small fault is to you!
When his feet abandoned the haste,
which robs every act of its dignity,
my mind, which before was constricted,
broadened its focus, as if eager,
and I set my face toward the slope
which toward the sky most highly expands.
The sun, which behind me was flaming red,
was broken before me by the form,
which had in me the support for its rays.
I turned to the side with fear
of being abandoned, when I saw
only before me the dark earth;
and my comfort: “Why do you still distrust?”,
began to say to me, turned fully around;
“do you not believe me with you and that I guide you?
Evening is already there where is buried
the body within which I used to cast a shadow;
Naples has it, and from Brindisi it was taken.
Now, if before me nothing is shadowed,
do not marvel more than at the heavens
that one does not impede the other’s ray.
To suffer torments, heat and frost,
such bodies the Power disposes
which, how it does so, does not wish to be revealed to us.
Mad is he who hopes that our reason
can traverse the infinite way
that one substance holds in three persons.
Be content, human race, with the ‘that’;
for, if you had been able to see everything,
there would have been no need for Mary to give birth;
and you have seen desire without fruit
such ones whose desire would have been quieted,
which eternally is given to them for grief:
I speak of Aristotle and of Plato
and of many others”; and here he bent his brow,
and said no more, and remained troubled.
We came meanwhile to the foot of the mountain;
there we found the rock so steep,
that there in vain would ready legs have been.
Between Lerici and Turbia the most deserted,
the most broken ruin is a stairway,
compared to this, easy and open.
«Now who knows on which side the slope descends,»
said my master, halting his pace,
«so that one who goes without wings may ascend?»
And while he, holding his face low,
was examining the way with his mind,
and I was looking up around the rock,
on the left hand a people appeared to me
of souls, who were moving their feet toward us,
and it did not seem so, they came so slowly.
«Lift,» I said, «master, your eyes:
behold, here are those who will give us counsel,
if from your own self you cannot have it.»
He looked then, and with a liberated air
replied: «Let us go there, for they come slowly;
and you, make firm your hope, sweet son.»
That folk was still far off,
I mean after a thousand steps of ours,
as far as a good thrower could cast by hand,
when they all pressed themselves to the hard stones
of the high bank, and stood still and close
as one who, doubting, goes, stands still to watch.
«O you who ended well, O spirits already chosen,»
Virgil began, «by that peace
which I believe is awaited by you all,
tell us where the mountain lies so
that it is possible to go upward;
for to lose time displeases most he who knows most.»
As the little sheep come out of the fold
one by one, by twos, by threes, and the others stand
timidly, casting down their eyes and muzzles;
and what the first one does, the others do,
huddling up to her, if she should stop,
simple and quiet, and know not the why;
so I saw the head of that fortunate flock
then begin to move and come forward,
modest in its face and in its gait dignified.
When those in front saw the light
broken on the ground by my right side,
so that the shadow was from me to the cliff,
they stopped, and drew themselves back a little,
and all the others who were coming behind,
not knowing the why, did just the same.
«Without your asking, I confess to you
that this is a human body that you see;
by which the sun's light on the ground is cleft.
Do not be amazed, but believe
that not without a power that comes from heaven
does he seek to overcome this wall.»
Thus the master; and that worthy people
said, «Turn back, go on ahead of us then,»
with the backs of their hands making a sign.
And one of them began: “Whoever
you are, as you go, turn your face:
consider if over there you ever saw me.”
I turned toward him and looked at him intently:
he was blond and handsome and of noble appearance,
but one of his brows a blow had split.
When I had humbly denied
ever having seen him, he said: “Now see”;
and he showed me a wound at the top of his chest.
Then smiling he said: “I am Manfred,
grandson of Empress Constance;
so I pray that, when you return,
you go to my beautiful daughter, mother
of the honor of Sicily and of Aragon,
and tell her the truth, if something else is said.
After I had my body broken
by two mortal wounds, I gave myself,
weeping, to Him who pardons willingly.
Horrible were my sins;
but infinite goodness has such great arms,
that it takes whatever turns to it.
If the pastor of Cosenza, who on the hunt
for me was sent by Clement then,
had read this face of God’s nature well,
the bones of my body would still be
at the head of the bridge near Benevento,
under the guard of the heavy stone-heap.
Now the rain bathes them and the wind moves them
outside the kingdom, near the Verde,
where he transferred them with candles extinguished.
Through their curse is not so lost,
that it cannot return, the eternal love,
as long as hope has a flower of green.
It is true that one who dies in contempt
of Holy Church, even though he repents at the end,
must stay outside this bank,
for thirty times for every period he was
in his presumption, unless such a decree
is not made shorter by good prayers.
See now if you can make me happy,
by revealing to my good Constance
how you have seen me, and also this prohibition;
for here, through those over there, much is gained.”
