When through delights or else through pains,
that any of our faculties may seize,
the soul gathers itself wholly to that one,
it seems to heed no other of its powers;
and this is counter to that error which believes
that one soul above another is lit within us.
And therefore, when one hears or sees a thing
that holds the soul turned strongly toward it,
time passes by and the man does not perceive it;
for one faculty is that which takes the note,
and another is that which has the entire soul:
the latter is as if bound, and the former is free.
Of this I had a true experience,
hearing that spirit and marveling;
for the sun had climbed a good fifty degrees,
and I had not noticed it, when
we came to where those souls with one voice
cried out to us: 'Here is what you ask for.'
A wider opening many a time hedges up
with a small forkful of his thorns
the peasant, when the grape grows dark,
than was the path by which my leader climbed,
and I behind him, we two alone,
after the company had parted from us.
One goes to San Leo and descends to Noli,
one climbs Bismantova and Cacume
with only feet; but here a man must fly;
I mean with the swift wings and with the plumes
of great desire, behind that guide
who gave me hope and was a light to me.
We were climbing up within the broken rock,
and the edge pressed us on either side,
and the ground beneath required feet and hands.
When we were on the topmost edge
of the high bank, on the open slope,
“My Master,” I said, “what way shall we take?”.
And he to me: “Let none of your steps fall back;
just gain ground up the mountain behind me,
until some wise guide appears to us.”
The summit was so high it overcame the sight,
and the slope far prouder
than the line from mid-quadrant to the center.
I was weary, when I began:
“O sweet father, turn, and see
how I am left alone, if you do not stop.”
“My son,” he said, “drag yourself up to here,”
pointing out to me a ledge a little above
that on that side encircles the whole hill.
His words so spurred me on,
that I forced myself, scrambling after him,
so that the terrace was beneath my feet.
We both sat down there
turned to the east from where we had climbed,
which is wont to comfort one who looks back.
I first directed my eyes to the low shores;
then raised them to the sun, and was amazed
that we were being struck by it from the left.
The poet well perceived that I stood
all amazed at the chariot of light,
where between us and the North it entered.
Whence he to me: “If Castor and Pollux
were in the company of that mirror
which leads its light upward and down,
you would see the reddish Zodiac
still rotate more closely to the Bears,
if it did not go out of its old path.
How this may be, if you wish to be able to think it,
with mind collected, imagine Zion
with this mountain to be on the earth
so that both have a single horizon
and different hemispheres; whence the road
that Phaethon knew not how to drive well,
you will see how it must of necessity go for this one
on one side, when for that one on the other side,
if your intellect pays clear attention.”
“Truly, my master,” I said, “never
did I see so clearly as I now discern
there where my intellect seemed to lack,
that the middle circle of the supernal motion,
which is called the Equator in some art,
and which always remains between the sun and the winter,
for the reason you say, from here departs
toward the north, as much as the Hebrews
saw it toward the hot part.
But if it pleases you, I would gladly know
how far we have to go; for the hill rises
more than my eyes are able to climb.”
And he to me: “This mountain is such,
that always at the beginning from below it is hard;
and the more one goes up, the less it hurts.
Therefore, when it will seem to you so gentle
so much, that going up will be as light for you
as going down with the current in a ship,
then you will be at the end of this path;
there expect to rest from your exhaustion.
I answer no more, and this I know for true.”
And as he had said his word,
a voice nearby sounded: “Perhaps
that to sit first you will have need!”
At its sound each of us turned,
and we saw on the left a great boulder,
which neither I nor he had noticed before.
There we drew ourselves; and there were people
who were staying in the shade behind the stone
as a man through negligence positions himself to stay.
And one of them, who seemed weary to me,
was sitting and embracing his knees,
holding his face down low between them.
“O my sweet lord,” I said, “behold
him who shows himself more negligent
than if laziness were his sister.”
Then he turned to us and paid mind,
moving his face just up along his thigh,
and said: “Now you go on up, you who are so valiant!”
I recognized then who he was, and that anguish
that still quickened my breath a little,
did not stop me from going to him; and after
I had reached him, he barely raised his head,
saying: “Have you clearly seen how the sun
from the left shoulder drives its chariot?”
His lazy acts and his short words
moved my lips a little to a smile;
then I began: “Belacqua, for you I no longer
grieve now; but tell me: why are you seated
right here? are you waiting for an escort,
or has your usual manner re-taken you?”
And he: “O brother, what is the use of going up?
for the angel of God who sits at the gate
would not let me go to the torments.
First it is required that the heavens circle me
outside it, for as long as they did in life,
because I delayed my good sighs to the end,
unless a prayer first helps me
that rises up from a heart that lives in grace;
what is the other worth, which is not heard in heaven?”
And already the poet was climbing before me,
and said: “Come now; see that the meridian is touched
by the sun and on the shore
night already covers Morocco with its foot.”
