I had already departed from those shades,
and was following the footsteps of my duke,
when from behind me, pointing a finger,
one cried out: “Look, it does not seem that the ray shines
from the left of that one below,
and he seems to conduct himself like one alive!”
I turned my eyes at the sound of this speech,
and saw them staring in wonder
just at me, just at me, and the light that was broken.
“Why is your spirit so ensnared,”
said the master, “that you slow your pace?
What does it matter to you what is whispered here?
Come behind me, and let the people talk:
stand like a firm tower, which never shakes
its summit for the blowing of the winds;
for always the man in whom thought sprouts
on top of thought, moves the goal farther from himself,
because the force of one weakens the other.”
What could I say in reply, if not “I am coming”?
I said it, sprinkled somewhat with the color
that sometimes makes a man worthy of pardon.
And meanwhile across the mountainside transversely
people were coming toward us, a little way ahead,
singing ‘Miserere’ verse by verse.
When they noticed that I gave no way
with my body for the passage of the rays,
they changed their song into a long and hoarse “oh!”;
and two of them, in the manner of messengers,
ran to meet us and asked of us:
“Of your condition make us informed.”
And my master: “You may go on your way
and report back to those who sent you
that the body of this man is true flesh.
If they stopped to see his shadow,
as I suppose, they are answered enough:
let them do him honor, and it may be dear to them.”
Fiery vapors I never saw so swiftly
at early night cleave the clear sky,
nor, at sunset, clouds of August,
that they did not return upward in less time;
and, arriving there, with the others they turned toward us,
like a troop that runs without a rein.
“These people who press toward us are many,
and they come to entreat you,” said the poet:
“so just keep walking, and in walking, listen.”
«O soul who goes to be happy
with those limbs with which you were born»,
they came shouting, «slow your pace a little.
Look if you have ever seen any of us,
so that you may carry news of him back there:
oh, why do you go on? oh, why don't you stop?
We were all once killed by force,
and sinners up to the final hour;
here a light from heaven made us aware,
so that, repenting and forgiving, out
of life we went, at peace with God,
who with desire to see Himself now grieves our hearts».
And I: «Though in your faces I may gaze,
I recognize no one; but if it pleases you
anything that I can do, spirits well-born,
you say it, and I will do it for that peace
that, behind the feet of such a guide,
I am made to seek from world to world».
And one began: «Each of us trusts
in your good will without you swearing it,
so long as inability does not cut off the will.
So I, who speak alone before the others,
beg you, if ever you see that country
that sits between Romagna and that of Charles,
that you be courteous to me with your prayers
in Fano, so that they may well pray for me
so that I can purge my grave offenses.
From there was I; but the deep wounds
from which the blood came out in which I sat,
were made for me in the lap of the Antenori,
there where I believed I was most safe:
that one from Este had it done, who held me in wrath
far more than justice would have willed.
But if I had fled toward La Mira,
when I was overtaken at Oriaco,
I would still be there where one breathes.
I ran to the marsh, and the reeds and the mire
entangled me so that I fell; and there I saw
my veins make of themselves a lake upon the ground».
Then another said: «Ah, so may the desire
be fulfilled that draws you to the high mountain,
with good piety help mine!
I was from Montefeltro, I am Bonconte;
Giovanna or others have no care for me;
for which I go among these with a lowered brow».
And I to him: «What force or what fortune
led you so far astray from Campaldino,
that your burial place was never known?».
«Oh!», he answered, «at the foot of the Casentino
a stream crosses that has the name Archiano,
which above the Hermitage is born in the Apennines.
There where its name becomes vain,
I arrived, pierced in the throat,
fleeing on foot and bloodying the plain.
There I lost my sight and my speech;
in the name of Mary I ended, and there
I fell, and my flesh remained alone.
I will speak the truth, and you repeat it among the living:
the angel of God took me, and the one from hell
shouted: “O you from heaven, why do you deprive me?
You carry off the eternal part of this man
for one little tear that takes him from me;
but of the other part I will make other government!”.
You know well how in the air is gathered
that humid vapor that turns back into water,
as soon as it rises where the cold catches it.
That evil will which only seeks evil joined
with intellect, and moved the smoke and the wind
by the power that his nature gave.
Then the valley, when the day was spent,
from Pratomagno to the great ridge he covered
with mist; and the sky above he made intent,
so that the pregnant air was converted to water;
the rain fell, and to the ditches came
from it that which the earth did not suffer;
and as it gathered into great torrents,
toward the royal river so fast
it rushed, that nothing held it back.
My frozen body at its mouth
the raging Archiano found; and that pushed it
into the Arno, and undid on my chest the cross
that I made of myself when the pain overcame me;
it rolled me along the banks and on the bottom,
then with its plunder covered and bound me».
«Ah, when you have returned to the world
and rested from the long journey»,
followed the third spirit after the second,
«remember me, who am Pia;
Siena made me, Maremma unmade me:
he knows it, the one who, having first ringed me,
had wed me with his gem».
