When the game of zara comes to an end,
the one who loses remains grieving,
repeating the throws, and sadly learns;
with the other one all the people go;
one goes in front, and one takes him from behind,
and one at his side brings himself to his mind;
he does not stop, and listens to this one and that;
to whom he extends a hand, that one no longer presses;
and so from the throng he defends himself.
Such was I in that thick crowd,
turning my face to them, here and there,
and by promising I freed myself from it.
There was the Aretine who from the fierce arms
of Ghin di Tacco had his death,
and the other who drowned running in the chase.
There prayed with outstretched hands
Federigo Novello, and that one from Pisa
who made the good Marzucco appear strong.
I saw Count Orso and the soul divided
from its body through hatred and through envy,
as he was saying, not for any crime committed;
Pier da la Broccia I mean; and here let her provide,
while she is on this side, the lady of Brabant,
so that she may not be of a worse flock.
When I was free from all those
shades that prayed only that others might pray,
so that their becoming holy might be hastened,
I began: “It seems that you deny me,
O my light, expressly in some text
that prayer can bend the decree of heaven;
and these people pray only for this:
would their hope then be in vain,
or is your saying not well manifest to me?”.
And he to me: “My writing is plain;
and the hope of these ones does not fail,
if one looks well with a sound mind;
for the summit of judgment is not lowered
because a fire of love fulfills in one moment
that which he who is stationed here must satisfy;
and there where I affirmed that point,
a defect was not mended by praying,
because the prayer was disjoined from God.
Truly, at so high a doubt
do not stop, unless she tells it to you
who will be a light between the truth and the intellect.
I do not know if you understand: I speak of Beatrice;
you will see her above, upon the summit
of this mountain, smiling and happy”.
And I: “Lord, let us go with greater haste,
for I no longer tire as I did before,
and see now that the hill casts its shadow.”
“We will go forward with this day,”
he answered, “as far as we now can;
but the fact is of another form than you suppose.
Before you are up there, you will see return
him who is now covered by the slope,
so that you do not cause his rays to break.
But see there a soul who, placed
all alone, looks toward us:
that one will teach us the quickest way.”
We came to it: O Lombard soul,
how you stood, proud and disdainful,
and in the movement of the eyes, dignified and slow!
It said not a single thing to us,
but let us go on, only gazing
in the manner of a lion when it rests.
Yet Virgil drew near to it, praying
that it show us the best ascent;
and that one did not answer his demand,
but of our country and of our life
it inquired of us; and the gentle duke began,
“Mantua . . . ,” and the shade, all secluded in itself,
rose toward him from the place where it first stood,
saying: “O Mantuan, I am Sordello
of your land!”; and the one embraced the other.
Ah, servile Italy, hostel of sorrow,
ship without a helmsman in a great tempest,
not lady of provinces, but a brothel!
That gentle soul was so quick,
just for the sweet sound of his land,
to make festival for his citizen here;
and now in you your living are not without war,
and one gnaws the other
of those whom one wall and one ditch enclose.
Search, wretched one, around the shores
your seacoasts, and then look into your bosom,
if any part in you enjoys peace.
What use was it that Justinian repaired the bridle for you,
if the saddle is empty?
Without it the shame would be less.
Ah, people who ought to be devout,
and let Caesar sit in the saddle,
if you well understand what God notes for you,
see how this beast has become vicious
for not being corrected by the spurs,
since you put your hand to the bridle-rein.
O German Albert, you who abandon
her who has become untamed and savage,
and you who ought to mount her saddlebows,
may a just judgment from the stars fall
upon your blood, and may it be new and manifest,
so that your successor may have fear of it!
For you and your father have allowed,
distracted by greed for things over there,
the garden of the empire to be a desert.
Come see Montecchi and Cappelletti,
Monaldi and Filippeschi, o man without a care:
those already wretched, and these with suspicions!
Come, cruel one, come, and see the oppression
of your nobles, and cure their wounds;
and you will see Santafiora how it is dark!
Come see your Rome that weeps
widowed and alone, and day and night calls:
'My Caesar, why do you not keep me company?'.
Come see how much the people love one another!
and if no pity for us moves you,
come to be ashamed of your own fame.
And if it is permitted to me, O supreme Jove
who on earth for us were crucified,
are your just eyes turned elsewhere?
Or is it a preparation that in the abyss
of your counsel you make for some good
entirely cut off from our understanding?
For the cities of Italy are all full
of tyrants, and a Marcellus becomes
every peasant who comes to join a party.
My Florence, you can well be content
with this digression that does not touch you,
thanks to your people who so exert themselves.
Many have justice in their heart, and it shoots late
so as not to come to the bow without counsel;
but your people have it on the tip of their tongue.
Many refuse the common burden;
but your people eagerly respond
without being called, and cry: “I take it on!”
Now be joyful, for you have good cause:
you rich, you with peace, and you with sense!
If I speak the truth, the result does not hide it.
Athens and Lacedaemon, who made
the ancient laws and were so civilized,
made to living well a tiny gesture
compared to you, who make such subtle
provisions, that to mid-November
does not last what you spin in October.
How many times, in the time you remember,
law, coinage, office, and custom
have you changed, and renewed your limbs!
And if you remember well and see the light,
you will see yourself like that sick woman
who cannot find rest on her feather bed,
but by turning wards off her pain.
