After the honest and happy welcomes
were repeated three and four times,
Sordello drew back, and said: “You, who are you?”.
“Before to this mountain were turned
the souls worthy to ascend to God,
my bones were buried by Octavian.
I am Virgil; and for no other sin
did I lose heaven than for not having faith.”
Thus my guide then answered.
As is he who a thing before him
suddenly sees at which he marvels,
who believes and does not, saying “It is . . . it is not . . .,”
such did he seem; and then he lowered his brow,
and humbly returned toward him,
and embraced him where the lesser one clings.
“O glory of the Latins,” he said, “through whom
our language showed what it could do,
o eternal honor of the place from which I came,
what merit or what grace shows you to me?
If I am worthy to hear your words,
tell me if you come from Hell, and from what cloister.”
“Through all the circles of the sorrowful kingdom,”
he answered him, “have I come from here;
power from heaven moved me, and with it I come.
Not for doing, but for not doing have I lost
the sight of the high Sun that you desire
and who was too late by me known.
A place is down there not sad with torments,
but with shadows only, where the laments
do not sound like wails, but are sighs.
There I stay with the innocent infants
bitten by the teeth of death before
they were from human guilt made exempt;
there I stay with those who the three holy
virtues did not clothe themselves with, and without vice
knew the others and followed them all.
But if you know and can, some indication
give us by which we may come more quickly
to where Purgatory has its true beginning.”
He answered: «No certain place is set for us;
it is licit for me to go up and around;
as far as I can go, I join you as a guide.
But see now how the day declines,
and to go up by night is not possible;
therefore it is good to think of a fair resting-place.
There are souls on the right here, set apart;
if you allow me, I will lead you to them,
and not without delight they will be known to you».
«How is this?», was the reply. «He who might wish
to climb by night, would he be impeded
by another, or would he not climb because he could not?».
And the good Sordello on the ground drew with his finger,
saying: «See? this line alone
you would not cross after the sun has departed:
not that anything else would give trouble,
than the nocturnal darkness, to going up;
that with powerlessness obstructs the will.
One could well with it return below
and walk the slope, wandering around,
while the horizon holds the day enclosed».
Then my lord, as if admiring,
«Lead us,» he said, «then, to where you say
that one can have delight in staying».
We had moved a short way from there,
when I perceived that the mountain was hollowed out,
in the way that valleys hollow them out here.
«There,» said that shade, «we will go
where the slope makes of itself a lap;
and there we will await the new day».
Between steep and level was a winding path,
that led us to the side of the hollow,
there where the rim dies away more than halfway.
Gold and fine silver, crimson and white lead,
indigo, wood bright and clear,
fresh emerald at the hour it is split,
by the grass and the flowers, within that bosom
placed, each would be surpassed in color,
as the lesser is surpassed by its greater.
Not only had nature painted there,
but with the sweetness of a thousand scents
it made there one unknown and blended.
'Salve, Regina,' on the green and on the flowers,
I then saw souls sitting and singing,
who from outside the valley were not apparent.
«Before the little sun now nests,»
began the Mantuan who had turned us,
«do not wish that I guide you among them.
From this ledge, better their acts and faces
you will recognize of all of them,
than down in the vale received among them.
That one who sits highest and makes semblances
of having neglected what he ought to have done,
and who does not move his mouth to the others' songs,
was Emperor Rudolf, who could have
healed the wounds that have left Italy dead,
so that late by others it is revived.
The other who in aspect comforts him,
ruled the land where the water is born
that the Vltava bears to the Elbe, and the Elbe to the sea:
Ottokar was his name, and in his swaddling clothes
he was far better than Wenceslaus his son,
bearded, whom lust and idleness fatten.
And that small-nosed one who in close counsel
seems with him who has so benign an aspect,
died fleeing and deflowering the lily:
look there how he beats his breast!
The other you see who has made for his cheek,
of his palm, sighing, a bed.
Father and father-in-law are they of the pest of France:
they know his vicious and squalid life,
and from this comes the grief that so pierces them.
That one who seems so stalwart and who harmonizes,
singing, with him of the manly nose,
of every virtue wore the belt;
and if the young man who sits behind him
had remained king after him,
virtue would have passed well from vessel to vessel,
which cannot be said of the other heirs;
James and Frederick have the realms;
of the better heritage neither possesses any.
Rarely does human probity
rise up through the branches; and He who gives it
wills this, so that it may be called for from Him.
To the large-nosed one also my words apply,
no less than to the other, Peter, who sings with him,
for whom Apulia and Provence now grieve.
His plant is as much inferior to its seed,
as, more than Beatrice and Margaret,
Constance still boasts of her husband.
See the king of the simple life
sitting there alone, Henry of England:
this one has in his branches a better issue.
That one who sits lowest among them,
looking upward, is William the Marquess,
for whom both Alessandria and his war
make Montferrat and Canavese weep».
