It was now the hour that turns the desire
of seafarers and softens the heart
the day they have said to sweet friends goodbye;
and that pierces the new pilgrim with love
if he hears a bell from afar
that seems to mourn the day that is dying;
when I began to make my hearing vain
and to gaze upon one of the souls
risen, who with her hand was asking for listening.
She joined and raised both her palms,
fixing her eyes toward the east,
as if saying to God: ‘For nothing else do I care’.
‘Te lucis ante’ so devoutly
issued from her mouth and with such sweet notes,
that it made me go out of my mind;
and the others then sweetly and devoutly
followed her through the entire hymn,
having their eyes on the supernal wheels.
Sharpen here, reader, your eyes well to the truth,
for the veil is now indeed so thin,
that certainly to pass inside it is easy.
I saw that noble host
silently afterward look upward,
as if waiting, pale and humble;
and I saw issue from on high and descend
two angels with two fiery swords,
truncated and deprived of their points.
Green as little leaves just now born
were they in their robes, which from green wings
struck, they drew behind and fanned.
The one came to stand a little above us,
and the other descended on the opposite bank,
so that the people were contained in the middle.
I could well discern in them the blond head;
but in the face the eye was lost,
like a faculty that is confused by too much.
«Both come from the bosom of Maria»,
said Sordello, «to guard the valley,
for the serpent that will come presently».
Wherefore I, who did not know by which path,
turned myself around, and drew close,
all frozen, to the faithful shoulders.
And Sordello again: “Now let us go down among the great shades, and we will speak to them; it will be most gracious for them to see you.”
Only three steps I think I descended, and I was below, and saw one who was gazing only at me, as if he wished to know me.
It was already the time that the air was darkening, but not so much that between his eyes and mine it did not make clear what it first concealed.
Toward me he came, and I toward him came: noble Judge Nino, how it pleased me when I saw you were not among the damned!
No lovely greeting between us was left unspoken; then he asked: “How long is it since you came to the foot of the mountain by the distant waters?”.
“Oh!” I said to him, “through the sorrowful places I came this morning, and I am in my first life, although the other, by so going, I am acquiring.”
And when my answer was heard, Sordello and he drew back like people suddenly bewildered.
One turned to Virgil and the other to one who was sitting there, crying: “Up, Currado! come see what God through grace has willed.”
Then, turned to me: “By that singular grace that you owe to him who so conceals his first ‘why,’ for which there is no ford,
when you are beyond the wide waves, tell my Giovanna to call for me there where the innocent are answered.
I do not think her mother loves me anymore, since she changed the white veils, which it is fitting that, wretched one!, she still longs for.
Through her it is very easily understood how long in a woman the fire of love lasts, if sight or touch does not often rekindle it.
Not so fine a sepulcher will be made for her by the viper that the Milanese encamp as the rooster of Gallura would have done.”
Thus he spoke, marked with the stamp, in his expression, of that righteous zeal that blazes with measure in the heart.
My greedy eyes were still going to the sky,
just there where the stars are slowest,
like a wheel closest to the axle.
And my duke: “Son, what do you watch up there?”
And I to him: “At those three torches
with which the pole on this side is all ablaze.”
Wherefore he to me: “The four bright stars
that you saw this morning, are low over there,
and these have risen where those were.”
As he was speaking, Sordello drew him to himself
saying: “See there our adversary”;
and pointed his finger so that he might look there.
From that side where it has no protection,
the little valley, was a serpent,
perhaps such as gave to Eve the bitter food.
Between the grass and the flowers came the evil streak,
turning its head from time to time, and its back
licking like a beast that preens itself.
I did not see, and therefore cannot say,
how the celestial goshawks moved;
but I saw well both the one and the other moved.
Hearing the air cleaved by the green wings,
the serpent fled, and the angels turned back,
flying upward equally to their posts.
The shade that had drawn close to the judge
when he called, throughout that whole assault
was not for a moment loosed from my gaze.
«So may the lamp that leads you on high
find in your free will as much wax
as is needed to reach the highest enamel»,
it began, «if you know true news
of Val di Magra or a neighboring part,
tell it to me, for I was once great there.
I was called Currado Malaspina;
I am not the elder, but from him I descended;
for my kin I bore the love that here is refined».
«Oh!», I said to him, «Through your lands
I have never been; but where can one dwell
in all of Europe where they are not renowned?
The fame that honors your house,
proclaims its lords and proclaims its land,
so that he knows of it who has not yet been there;
and I swear to you, so may I go above,
that your honored family does not strip itself
of the glory of the purse and of the sword.
Custom and nature so privilege it,
that, though the guilty head twists the world,
it alone goes straight and scorns the evil path».
And he: «Now go; for the sun will not lie down again
seven times in the bed that the Ram
with all four feet covers and bestrides,
before this courteous opinion of yours
shall be nailed into the middle of your head
with stronger nails than another’s speech,
if the course of judgment is not halted».
