The concubine of ancient Tithonus
was already whitening on the balcony of the east,
forth from the arms of her sweet friend;
of gems her forehead was resplendent,
placed in the shape of the cold animal
that with its tail strikes the people;
and the night, of the steps with which it climbs,
had taken two in the place where we were,
and the third was already bending down its wings;
when I, who had with me that of Adam,
overcome by sleep, upon the grass bent down
there where all five of us were already sitting.
In the hour when the sad laments begin
from the little swallow near the morning,
perhaps in memory of her first woes,
and when our mind, a pilgrim
further from the flesh and less held by thoughts,
in its visions is almost divine,
in a dream it seemed to me I saw suspended
an eagle in the sky with feathers of gold,
with wings spread and intent on descending;
and I seemed to be there where were
abandoned his companions by Ganymede,
when he was rapt to the supreme conclave.
Within me I thought: ‘Perhaps this one strikes
only here by habit, and perhaps from another place
it disdains to carry one up in its talons.’
Then it seemed to me that, after it wheeled a little,
terrible as lightning it descended,
and snatched me upward as far as the fire.
There it seemed that it and I were burning;
and the imagined fire so scorched,
that it was necessary for my sleep to break.
Not otherwise did Achilles start up,
his awakened eyes turning all around
and not knowing where he was,
when his mother from Chiron to Scyros
secretly carried him sleeping in her arms,
from where the Greeks later took him away;
so did I startle, as from my face
sleep fled, and I became pale,
like a man who, terrified, freezes.
At my side was only my comfort,
and the sun was already more than two hours high,
and my face was turned to the seashore.
«Have no fear», said my lord;
«be assured, for we are at a good point;
do not constrain, but expand all your strength.
You have now reached Purgatory:
see there the cliff that encloses it;
see the entrance there where it seems parted.
A while ago, in the dawn that precedes the day,
when your soul was sleeping within you,
over the flowers with which it is adorned down there
came a lady, and said: ‘I am Lucia;
let me take this man who sleeps;
so I will ease him on his way’.
Sordello remained and the other noble forms;
she took you, and as the day grew bright,
she came upward; and I along her tracks.
Here she set you down, but first showed me
her beautiful eyes that open entrance;
then she and sleep went away at once».
In the manner of a man who in doubt is reassured
and who changes his fear into comfort,
after the truth has been discovered to him,
I changed; and when without care
my leader saw me, up the cliff
he moved, and I behind him toward the height.
Reader, you see well how I elevate
my subject matter, and therefore with more art
do not marvel if I support it.
We drew near, and were at a place
where what before had seemed to me broken,
just like a fissure that parts a wall,
I saw a gate, and three steps below
to go to it, of different colors,
and a gatekeeper who as yet made no sound.
And as my eye opened more and more to it,
I saw him sitting on the highest step,
such in the face that I did not endure it;
and a naked sword he had in his hand,
that reflected the rays so toward us,
that I often directed my face in vain.
"Speak from there: what do you want?",
he began to say, "where is the escort?
Beware lest the coming up should harm you."
"A Lady of heaven, of these things aware,"
my master answered him, "just now
said to us: ‘Go there: there is the gate’."
"And may she advance your steps for good,"
began again the courteous gatekeeper:
"Come forward then to our steps."
There we came; and the first step
was white marble so polished and clean,
that I mirrored myself in it as I appear.
The second was dyed darker than perse,
of a rough and fire-scorched stone,
cracked lengthwise and crosswise.
The third, which is massive on top,
seemed to me porphyry, so flaming
like blood that spurts out of a vein.
Upon this held both his feet
the angel of God, sitting on the threshold
that seemed to me a stone of diamond.
Up the three steps, with good will,
my leader drew me, saying: "Ask
humbly that he undo the lock."
Devoutly I cast myself at the holy feet;
I asked for mercy and that he should open for me,
but first I struck my breast three times.
Seven P’s on my forehead he inscribed
with the point of his sword, and “See that you wash,
when you are inside, these wounds,” he said.
Ash, or earth that is dug up dry,
would be of one color with his vestment;
and from beneath it he drew two keys.
The one was of gold and the other was of silver;
first with the white and then with the yellow
he worked the gate so, that I was content.
"Whenever one of these keys fails,
so that it does not turn rightly in the keyhole,"
he said to us, "this passage does not open.
One is more precious; but the other requires too much
of art and skill before it will unlock,
because it is the one that unties the knot.
From Peter I hold them; and he told me I should err
rather in opening than in keeping it locked,
provided that the people prostrate themselves at my feet."
Then he pushed the door of the sacred gate,
saying: "Enter; but I make you aware
that he who looks back returns outside."
And when upon their grating hinges turned
the pivots of that sacred portal,
which are of resounding and strong metal,
not so roared nor showed itself so harsh
Tarpeia, when the good Metellus was taken from it,
whereby it then remained lean.
I turned, attentive to the first thunder,
and ‘Te Deum laudamus’ it seemed to me
I heard in a voice mixed with the sweet sound.
Such an impression exactly was rendered to me
by what I heard, as one is wont to get
when people are singing with an organ;
that now yes, now no, the words are understood.
