Then we were inside the threshold of the gate
that the evil love of souls makes unused,
because it makes the crooked way seem straight,
sounding, I heard it being reclosed;
and if I had turned my eyes toward it,
what would have been a worthy excuse for the fault?
We were climbing through a cleft rock,
that moved from one and the other side,
like the wave that flees and approaches.
"Here it is fitting to use a little skill,"
my leader began, "in keeping close
now here, now there to the side that recedes."
And this made our steps scarce,
so that before the waning of the moon
had rejoined its bed to lie down again,
we were out of that needle’s eye;
but when we were free and in the open
up where the mountain draws back together,
I tired and both of us uncertain
of our way, we stopped on a level place
more solitary than roads through deserts.
From its edge, where the void borders it,
to the foot of the high cliff that still rises,
would measure three times a human body;
and as far as my eye could take wing,
now on the left and now on the right flank,
this terrace seemed to me so.
Our feet had not yet moved up there,
when I perceived that the bank around,
which was lacking a sheer slope for ascent,
was of white marble and adorned
with such carvings that not only Polyclitus,
but nature herself would there be shamed.
The angel who came to earth with the decree
of the peace wept for through many years,
which opened heaven from its long ban,
appeared before us so vividly
carved there in a gentle attitude,
that he did not seem a silent image.
One would have sworn that he was saying ‘Ave!’;
because there was imaged she
who turned the key to open the high love;
and had in her attitude impressed these words,
‘Ecce ancilla Dei,’ as precisely
as a figure is stamped on wax.
"Do not keep your mind on one place only,"
said the sweet master, who had me
on that side where people have their heart.
Wherefore I moved my gaze, and saw
behind Mary, on that side
where he who was moving me was,
another story set into the rock;
so I passed Virgil, and drew near,
so that it might be presented to my eyes.
There was carved in the same marble
the cart and the oxen, drawing the holy ark,
which makes one fear an uncommissioned office.
Before it appeared people; and the whole crowd,
divided into seven choirs, made my two senses
—one say ‘No,’ the other ‘Yes, they sing.’
Likewise with the smoke of the incense
that was imaged there, the eyes and the nose
became discordant between yes and no.
There, preceding the blessed vessel,
dancing with robes uplifted, was the humble psalmist,
and in that instance was both more and less than king.
Opposite, portrayed at a window
of a great palace, Michal was looking on
like a woman scornful and sad.
I moved my feet from the place where I was standing,
to look closely at another story,
that gleamed white behind Michal.
There was storied the high glory
of the Roman prince, whose worth
moved Gregory to his great victory;
I speak of the Emperor Trajan;
and a poor little widow was at his bridle,
in an attitude of tears and of grief.
Around him it seemed trampled and full
of knights, and the eagles in gold
above them visibly moved in the wind.
The poor little woman among all of these
seemed to say: “Lord, give me vengeance
for my son who is dead, for which I grieve”;
and he to her to answer: “Now wait
until I return”; and she: “My lord,”
like a person in whom grief is urgent,
“if you do not return?”; and he: “Who is in my place,
will do it for you”; and she: “What is another’s good
to you, if you forget your own?”;
wherefore he: “Now be comforted; for it is meet
that I fulfill my duty before I move:
justice wills it and pity holds me back.”
He who never saw a new thing
produced this visible speech,
new to us because its like is not found here.
While I was delighting to look at
the images of such great humilities,
and dear to see because of their Maker,
«Look over here, but they take slow steps»,
murmured the poet, «are many people:
these will direct us to the high terraces».
My eyes, which were content in gazing
to see new things of which they are fond,
in turning toward him were not slow.
I do not wish, however, reader, that you be dismayed
from your good resolve on hearing
how God wills that the debt be paid.
Do not focus on the form of the torment:
think of what follows; think that at worst
beyond the great sentence it cannot go.
I began: «Master, that which I see
moving toward us does not seem to me like people,
and I know not what, so much in my seeing am I deluded».
And he to me: «The grievous condition
of their torment hunches them to the earth,
so that my own eyes at first had a contest with it.
But look intently there, and disentangle
with your sight what comes beneath those stones:
already you can perceive how each one beats himself».
O proud Christians, miserable and weary,
who, infirm in the vision of the mind,
place your trust in backward steps,
do you not perceive that we are worms
born to form the angelic butterfly,
that flies to justice without defenses?
Of what does your spirit float on high,
since you are almost defective automata,
like a worm in which formation fails?
As to support a ceiling or a roof,
for a corbel sometimes a figure
is seen to join its knees to its chest,
which from the unreal makes real distress
arise in whoever sees it; made thus
I saw those souls, when I paid good heed.
True it is that more and less they were contracted
according to the more and less they had on their backs;
and he who had most patience in his acts,
weeping seemed to say: ‘I can no more’.
