«O our Father, who art in the heavens,
not circumscribed, but for the greater love
that you have for the first effects up there,
lauded be your name and your worth
by every creature, as it is worthy
to give thanks to your sweet effluence.
May the peace of your kingdom come to us,
for we cannot reach it by ourselves,
if it does not come, with all our intellect.
As of their will your angels
make sacrifice to you, singing 'hosanna,'
so may men do of theirs.
Give to us this day the daily manna,
without which through this harsh desert
he goes backward who most strives to go on.
And as we the evil we have suffered
forgive to each one, so you forgive
benevolent, and do not look upon our merit.
Our virtue which is easily overcome,
do not test with the ancient adversary,
but deliver it from him who so spurs it.
This last prayer, dear Lord,
is not made for us, for there is no need,
but for those who remained behind us».
Thus praying for themselves and for us a good journey,
those shades went beneath their weight,
like that which one sometimes dreams of,
unequally anguished all in a circle
and weary on the first cornice,
purging the gloom of the world.
If from there good is always spoken for us,
from here what can be said and done for them
by those who have a good root to their will?
Indeed one must help them wash the marks
that they brought from hence, so that, cleansed and light,
they may go forth to the starry wheels.
«Ah, so may justice and piety unburden you
soon, so that you may be able to move the wing,
which according to your desire may lift you,
show us on which hand toward the stair
one goes most shortly; and if there is more than one pass,
teach us that one which descends less steeply;
for this one who comes with me, because of the burden
of the flesh of Adam with which he is clothed,
in climbing up, against his will, is slow».
Their words, which they returned to these
that he whom I followed had said,
were not from whom they came made manifest;
but it was said: «On the right hand along the bank
come with us, and you will find the pass
possible for a living person to climb.
And were I not hindered by the stone
that tames my proud neck,
for which I must carry my face low,
that one, who is still alive and does not name himself,
I would look at, to see if I know him,
and to make him feel pity for this burden.
I was Italian and born of a great Tuscan:
Guglielmo Aldobrandeschi was my father;
I do not know if his name was ever with you.
The ancient blood and the noble deeds
of my ancestors made me so arrogant,
that, not thinking of the common mother,
I held every man in such great contempt,
that I died from it, as the Sienese know,
and every child in Campagnatico knows it.
I am Omberto; and not to me alone does pride
do harm, for all my kinsmen
has she drawn with her into misfortune.
And here it is fitting that I carry this weight
for it, until God is satisfied,
since I did it not among the living, here among the dead».
Listening, I bent down my face;
and one of them, not the one who was speaking,
twisted himself under the weight that encumbers them,
and saw me and knew me and called out,
keeping his eyes fixed with difficulty
on me who walked all bent along with them.
«Oh!» I said to him, «are you not Oderisi,
the honor of Gubbio and the honor of that art
that in Paris is called ‘illuminating’?».
«Brother,» he said, «the pages smile more
that Franco Bolognese brushes;
the honor is now all his, and mine in part.
Truly I would not have been so courteous
while I was alive, for the great desire
for excellence on which my heart was set.
For such pride the fee is paid here;
and I would not yet be here, if it were not
that, while able to sin, I turned to God.
O vain glory of human powers!
how little the green on the summit lasts,
if it is not overtaken by cruder ages!
Cimabue believed in painting
to hold the field, and now Giotto has the cry,
so that the fame of that one is obscure.
Thus has one Guido taken from the other
the glory of the tongue; and perhaps he is born
who will chase both from the nest.
Worldly renown is nothing but a breath
of wind, that now comes from here and now comes from there,
and changes its name because it changes its side.
What greater name will you have, if you shed your flesh when old
than if you had died
before you left off ‘pappo’ and ‘dindi’,
before a thousand years have passed? which is a shorter
space to eternity than a movement of the eyelids
to the circle that revolves slowest in the heavens.
He who takes up so little of the path
before me, all of Tuscany resounded with him;
and now he is barely whispered of in Siena,
of which he was lord when the Florentine fury was destroyed,
which was as proud at that time as it is now a harlot.
Your renown is the color of grass,
which comes and goes, and He discolors it
by whom it comes forth unripe from the earth».
And I to him: “Your true words encourage in me
good humility, and level a great swelling in me;
but who is he of whom you were just speaking?”
“That is,” he answered, “Provenzan Salvani;
and he is here because he was presumptuous
to bring all of Siena into his hands.
He has gone thus and goes, without rest,
since he died; such coin he pays
to satisfy for having been too daring on earth.”
And I: “If that spirit who waits,
before he repents, for the edge of life,
stays down here and does not ascend up here,
unless good prayers aid him,
before a time equal to his life has passed,
how was his coming granted to him?”
“When he was living most gloriously,” he said,
“freely in the Campo di Siena,
having cast aside all shame, he placed himself;
and there, to draw his friend from the pain
that he sustained in the prison of Charles,
he brought himself to tremble through every vein.
I will say no more, and I know I speak obscurely;
but little time will pass, before your neighbors
will act so that you will be able to gloss it.
That deed took those boundaries from him.”
