Side by side, like oxen that go in a yoke,
I went along with that burdened soul,
as long as the gentle teacher allowed it.
But when he said: “Leave him and cross over;
for here it is good with sails and with oars,
as much as he can, that each one push his boat”;
straight as one ought to walk I made myself again
in my person, although the thoughts
remained in me both bent and humbled.
I had set myself in motion, and was following willingly
the steps of my master, and we both
already were showing how light we were;
and he said to me: “Turn your eyes downward:
it will be good for you, to ease the way,
to see the bed of your soles.”
As, so that there may be a memory of them,
over the buried the earthen tombs
bear marked what they were before,
wherefore there one often weeps again
for the sting of remembrance,
which only spurs on the pious;
so I saw there, but of better appearance
according to the craftsmanship, figured
all that of the path juts out from the mountain.
I saw him who was created noble
more than any other creature, down from heaven
falling like lightning, on one side.
I saw Briareus, pierced by the celestial
bolt, lie on the other side,
heavy on the earth from the mortal chill.
I saw Thymbraeus, I saw Pallas and Mars,
still armed, around their father,
gazing on the scattered limbs of the Giants.
I saw Nimrod at the foot of the great work,
as if bewildered, looking at the peoples
who in Shinar were proud with him.
O Niobe, with what grieving eyes
I saw you depicted upon the path,
among your seven and seven children slain!
O Saul, how upon your own sword
you there appeared dead on Gilboa,
which then felt neither rain nor dew!
O foolish Arachne, so I saw you
already half a spider, sad upon the tatters
of the work that was evilly done for you.
O Rehoboam, your image there no longer
seems to threaten; but full of terror
a chariot carries it off, without anyone pursuing.
The hard pavement showed again
how Alcmaeon made his mother pay dearly
for the ill-fated ornament.
It showed how the sons threw themselves
upon Sennacherib inside the temple,
and how, he being dead, they left him there.
It showed the ruin and the cruel slaughter
that Tomyris wrought, when she said to Cyrus:
“You thirsted for blood, and I fill you with blood.”
It showed how in rout fled
the Assyrians, after Holofernes was dead,
and also the remains of the slaughter.
I saw Troy in ashes and in caverns;
O Ilion, how low and vile
the carving discerned there showed you!
What master of brush or of stylus
was there who could have portrayed the shades and the features that there
would make a subtle mind marvel?
The dead seemed dead and the living seemed alive:
he who saw the truth did not see better than I,
for all that I trod upon, while I went bent over.
Now be proud, and on with haughty face,
sons of Eve, and do not bend your face
so that you may see your evil path!
More of the mountain was already turned by us
and of the sun’s path much more was spent
than the mind, not yet free, had estimated,
when he who always, attentive, went before
began: “Lift up your head;
it is no longer time to go so absorbed.
See there an angel who makes ready
to come toward us; see that there returns
from the service of the day the sixth handmaiden.
With reverence adorn your face and actions,
so that he may delight in sending us upward;
think that this day will never dawn again!”
I was well used to his admonishing
never to lose time, so that on that
matter he could not speak to me obscurely.
Toward us came the beautiful creature,
clothed in white and in his face such as
a trembling morning star appears.
He opened his arms, and then he opened his wings;
he said: “Come: here the steps are near,
and from now on one easily ascends.
To this invitation come very few:
O human race, born to fly upward,
why at a little wind do you so fall?”
He led us to where the rock was cut;
there he beat his wings upon my forehead;
then he promised me a safe passage.
As on the right hand, to climb the mountain
where the church sits that dominates
the well-guided city over Rubaconte,
the daring rush of the ascent is broken
by the stairs that were made in an age
when the ledger and the stave were secure;
so the bank that falls
here quite steeply from the other circle is made less steep;
but on this side and that the high rock grazes.
As we were turning our persons there,
‘Blessed are the poor in spirit!’ voices
sang so, that no speech could tell it.
Ah, how different are those entrances
from the infernal! for here one enters with songs,
and there below with fierce laments.
Already we were climbing the holy stairs,
and I seemed to be much lighter
than I had seemed on the plain before.
Wherefore I: “Master, tell me, what heavy thing
has been lifted from me, that almost no
fatigue is felt by me in walking?”.
He replied: “When the P’s that have remained
still on your face, almost faded,
are, like the one, completely erased,
your feet will be so conquered by good will,
that not only will they feel no fatigue,
but it will be their delight to be pushed upward”.
Then I did like those who go
with something on their head unknown to them,
unless the gestures of others make them suspect;
for which the hand helps itself to ascertain,
and seeks and finds and fulfills that office
which cannot be supplied by sight;
and with the fingers of my right hand spread,
I found only six of the letters that he of the keys
had inscribed on me above the temples:
at which sight, my leader smiled.
