We were at the summit of the stairway,
where for a second time is cut back
the mountain that in climbing cures one of sin.
There in the same way a terrace binds
the hill all around, like the first one;
except that its arc bends more quickly.
No shade is there nor any carving to be seen:
the bank appeared bare and the path appeared sheer
with the livid color of the stone.
“If here one waits to ask for people,”
the poet reasoned, “I fear perhaps
that our choice will have too much delay.”
Then he fixed his eyes steadfastly on the sun;
he made his right side the center of his turn,
and swung around the left part of himself.
“O sweet light in which I trustingly enter
upon the new path, you lead us,”
he said, “as one needs to be led in here.
You warm the world, you shine above it;
if other reason does not point against it,
your rays must always be our guides.”
As far as is counted here for a mile,
so far had we already gone there,
in little time, because of our ready will;
and spirits were heard flying toward us,
though they were not seen, spirits speaking
courteous invitations to the table of love.
The first voice that passed in flight
said loudly, ‘Vinum non habent,’
and went reiterating it behind us.
And before it was completely out of hearing
from having moved away, another, ‘I am Orestes,’
passed by crying, and it also did not stop.
“Oh!” I said, “father, what voices are these?”
And as I asked, here came the third,
saying: ‘Love those from whom you have had evil.’
And the good master: “This circle scourges
the fault of envy, and therefore are
the cords of the whip drawn from love.
The bridle must be of the contrary sound;
I believe you will hear it, in my opinion,
before you reach the pass of forgiveness.
«But fix your eyes through the air quite intently,
and you will see people sitting before us,
and each one is seated along the bank».
Then more than before I opened my eyes;
I looked before me, and saw shades with mantles
of a color not different from the stone.
And after we were a little further on,
I heard them cry: ‘Mary, pray for us’:
cry ‘Michael’ and ‘Peter’ and ‘All Saints’.
I do not believe that on earth there goes today
a man so hard, that he would not be pierced
by compassion for what I saw then;
for, when I had come so near to them,
that their condition came clearly to me,
a heavy grief was wrung from my eyes.
Of vile hair-cloth they seemed to me covered,
and one supported the other with his shoulder,
and all were supported by the bank.
Thus the blind to whom livelihood is lacking,
stand at pardons to ask for their need,
and one his head upon the other lets fall,
so that pity in others may quickly be roused,
not only for the sound of the words,
but for the sight that no less entreats.
And as to the sightless the sun is no help,
so to the shades here, of whom I now speak,
the light of heaven does not wish to grant itself;
for an iron wire pierces the eyelids of them all
and sews them up, as to a wild hawk
is done because it does not stay quiet.
It seemed to me, in passing, to do an outrage,
seeing others, without being seen:
for which I turned to my wise counsel.
He well knew what the mute one meant to say;
and therefore did not wait for my request,
but said: «Speak, and be brief and to the point».
Virgil was coming to me on that side
of the terrace from which one can fall,
because it is wreathed by no bank;
on the other side were the devout
shades, who through the horrible stitching
pressed so, that they bathed their cheeks.
I turned to them and: «O people assured,»
I began, «of seeing the high light
that your desire alone has in its care,
so may grace soon dissolve the scum
of your conscience so that clear
through it may descend the river of the mind,
tell me, for it will be gracious and dear to me,
if any soul is here among you that is Italian;
and perhaps it will be good for her if I learn of it».
«O frate mio, ciascuna è cittadina
d’una vera città; ma tu vuo’ dire
che vivesse in Italia peregrina».
Questo mi parve per risposta udire
più innanzi alquanto che là dov’ io stava,
ond’ io mi feci ancor più là sentire.
Tra l’altre vidi un’ombra ch’aspettava
in vista; e se volesse alcun dir ‘Come?’,
lo mento a guisa d’orbo in sù levava.
«Spirto», diss’ io, «che per salir ti dome,
se tu se’ quelli che mi rispondesti,
fammiti conto o per luogo o per nome».
«Io fui sanese», rispuose, «e con questi
altri rimendo qui la vita ria,
lagrimando a colui che sé ne presti.
Savia non fui, avvegna che Sapìa
fossi chiamata, e fui de li altrui danni
più lieta assai che di ventura mia.
E perché tu non creda ch’io t’inganni,
odi s’i’ fui, com’ io ti dico, folle,
già discendendo l’arco d’i miei anni.
Eran li cittadin miei presso a Colle
in campo giunti co’ loro avversari,
e io pregava Iddio di quel ch’e’ volle.
Rotti fuor quivi e vòlti ne li amari
passi di fuga; e veggendo la caccia,
letizia presi a tutte altre dispari,
tanto ch’io volsi in sù l’ardita faccia,
gridando a Dio: “Omai più non ti temo!”,
come fé ’l merlo per poca bonaccia.
Pace volli con Dio in su lo stremo
de la mia vita; e ancor non sarebbe
lo mio dover per penitenza scemo,
se ciò non fosse, ch’a memoria m’ebbe
Pier Pettinaio in sue sante orazioni,
a cui di me per caritate increbbe.
Ma tu chi se’, che nostre condizioni
vai dimandando, e porti li occhi sciolti,
sì com’ io credo, e spirando ragioni?».
«Li occhi», diss’ io, «mi fieno ancor qui tolti,
ma picciol tempo, ché poca è l’offesa
fatta per esser con invidia vòlti.
Troppa è più la paura ond’ è sospesa
l’anima mia del tormento di sotto,
che già lo ’ncarco di là giù mi pesa».
Ed ella a me: «Chi t’ha dunque condotto
qua sù tra noi, se giù ritornar credi?».
E io: «Costui ch’è meco e non fa motto.
E vivo sono; e però mi richiedi,
spirito eletto, se tu vuo’ ch’i’ mova
di là per te ancor li mortai piedi».
«Oh, questa è a udir sì cosa nuova»,
rispuose, «che gran segno è che Dio t’ami;
però col priego tuo talor mi giova.
E cheggioti, per quel che tu più brami,
se mai calchi la terra di Toscana,
che a’ miei propinqui tu ben mi rinfami.
Tu li vedrai tra quella gente vana
che spera in Talamone, e perderagli
più di speranza ch’a trovar la Diana;
ma più vi perderanno li ammiragli».
