«Who is this man who circles our mountain
before death has given him flight,
and opens and closes his eyes at his will?».
«I do not know who he is, but I know he is not alone;
you ask him, you who are closer to him,
and welcome him gently, so that he may speak».
Thus two spirits, leaning one upon the other,
were speaking of me there on my right-hand side;
then they turned up their faces to speak to me;
and one said: «O soul who, fixed
still in the body, go your way toward heaven,
for charity's sake, console us and tell us
whence you come and who you are; for you make us
marvel so at your grace,
as much as a thing requires that has never been before».
And I: «Through the middle of Tuscany there spreads
a little river that is born in Falterona,
and a hundred miles of course does not sate it.
From above it I bring this person:
to tell you who I am would be to speak in vain,
for my name does not yet sound forth much».
«If I correctly flesh out your meaning
with my intellect,» he who had spoken first
then answered me, «you speak of the Arno».
And the other said to him: «Why did this one hide
the name of that river,
just as one does with horrible things?».
And the shade who of this had been asked,
discharged his debt thus: “I know not; but worthy
it is that the name of such a valley should perish;
for from its beginning, where is so swollen
the alpine mount from which Peloro is cut off,
that in few places does it pass beyond that mark,
down to where it renders itself to restore
that which the sky from the sea draws up,
whence the rivers have that which goes with them,
virtue is so fled from as an enemy
by all, like a viper, either through misfortune
of the place, or by bad custom that goads them:
whence they have so changed their nature,
the inhabitants of the wretched valley,
that it seems Circe had them in her pasture.
Among foul swine, more worthy of acorns
than of other food made for human use,
it first directs its poor course.
It then finds curs, coming down,
more snarling than their power warrants,
and from them disdainfully twists its snout.
It goes on falling; and the more it swells,
the more it finds the dogs become wolves,
that cursed and luckless ditch.
Descended then through more deep basins,
it finds the foxes so full of fraud
that they fear no device that might ensnare them.
Nor will I cease to speak because another hears me;
and it will be good for this one, if he still recalls
what a true spirit reveals to me.
I see your grandson who becomes
a hunter of those wolves upon the bank
of the fierce river, and he terrifies them all.
He sells their flesh while it is living;
then he slaughters them like an old beast;
many of life and himself of worth he deprives.
Bloodstained he comes out of the sad wood;
he leaves it such, that from now to a thousand years
it will not re-wood itself into its former state.”
As at the announcement of grievous harms
the face of him who listens is troubled,
from whatever side the peril may assault him,
so I saw the other soul, who was turned
to listen, become troubled and grow sad,
after he had gathered the word unto himself.
The speech of the one and the sight of the other
made me desirous to know their names,
and I made a request mixed with entreaties;
wherefore the spirit who had first spoken to me
began again: “You want me to condescend
to do for you what you will not do for me.
But since God wishes that in you should shine forth
so much of his grace, I will not be stingy with you;
therefore know that I was Guido del Duca.
My blood was so scorched by envy,
that if I had seen a man become happy,
you would have seen me suffused with lividness.
From my sowing I reap such straw;
o human race, why do you set your heart
there where partnership must be forbidden?
This is Rinier; this is the pride and the honor
of the house of Calboli, where no one
has since made himself heir to his worth.
And not only has his bloodline become barren,
between the Po and the mountain and the sea and the Reno,
of the good required for truth and for delight;
for within these bounds is filled
with venomous stumps, so that late
would they now be lessened by cultivation.
Where is the good Lizio and Arrigo Mainardi?
Pier Traversaro and Guido di Carpigna?
Oh Romagnols, turned into bastards!
When in Bologna will a Fabbro be regrafted?
when in Faenza a Bernardin di Fosco,
a noble shoot from a small weed?
Do not marvel if I weep, Tuscan,
when I remember, with Guido da Prata,
Ugolin d’Azzo who lived among us,
Federigo Tignoso and his company,
the house of Traversara and the Anastagi
(and the one family and the other is disinherited),
the ladies and the knights, the struggles and the comforts
that love and courtesy made us desire
there where hearts have become so wicked.
O Bretinoro, why do you not flee,
since your family has gone away
and many people, not to be wicked?
Bagnacaval does well, that it has no more sons;
and Castrocaro does ill, and Conio worse,
which strives to beget such counts.
The Pagani will do well, once their demon
has gone from them; but not so that a pure
witness of them may ever remain.
O Ugolin de’ Fantolin, secure
is your name, since no one is expected
who, by degenerating, could darken it.
But go away now, Tuscan; for now it pleases me
too much to weep rather than to speak,
so much has our discourse constricted my mind.”
We knew that those dear souls
heard us go; therefore, by their silence,
they made us confident of the path.
After we were left to proceed alone,
it seemed a lightning bolt when it cleaves the air,
a voice that came from the opposite side, saying:
‘Whoever finds me will slay me’;
and it fled like thunder that dies away
if the cloud should suddenly burst.
As our hearing had a respite from it,
behold, the other with so great a crash
that it resembled thunder which quickly follows:
“I am Aglauros who became stone”;
and then, to draw closer to the poet,
I took my step to the right, and not forward.
Now the air on every side was quiet;
and he said to me: “That was the hard bridle
that ought to keep man within his bounds.
But you take the bait, so that the hook
of the ancient adversary pulls you to him;
and therefore little avails a rein or a call.
The heavens call you and circle around you,
showing you their eternal beauties,
and your eye still looks only at the earth;
wherefore He who discerns all strikes you.”
