As much as between the end of the third hour
and the day’s beginning appears of the sphere
that always plays in the guise of a child,
so much seemed already toward the evening
to be remaining for the sun of its course;
it was vespers there, and here midnight.
And the rays were striking us through the middle of the nose,
because the mountain had been so circled by us,
that we were now going straight toward the west,
when I felt my brow weighed down
by a splendor far more than before,
and things unknown were a wonder to me;
wherefore I raised my hands toward the top
of my brows, and made myself a sun-shield,
which files away the excess of the visible.
As when from water or from a mirror
the ray leaps to the opposite side,
rising up in the same way
as that which descends, and departs as much
from the fall of a stone in equal measure,
as experience and science show;
so it seemed to me by reflected light
there before me to be struck;
for which my sight was quick to flee.
“What is that, sweet father, from which I cannot
shield my face so that it avails me,”
I said, “and seems to be moving toward us?”.
“Do not marvel if it still dazzles you,
the family of heaven,” he answered me:
“it is a messenger who comes to invite one to ascend.
Soon it will be that to see these things
will not be grievous to you, but will be a delight
as great as nature has disposed you to feel.”
Then we came to the blessed angel,
who with a joyful voice said: “Enter here
to a stairway far less steep than the others.”
We were climbing, having already departed from there,
and ‘Blessed are the merciful!’ was
sung behind, and ‘Rejoice, you who overcome!’.
My master and I, we two alone,
were going upward; and I thought, while walking,
to gain profit from his words;
and I addressed myself to him, asking thus:
"What did the spirit from Romagna mean,
mentioning 'prohibition' and 'partnership'?".
At which he to me: "Of his greatest fault
he knows the damage; and therefore let no one wonder
if he rebukes it, so that there may be less weeping.
Because your desires are set
where by partnership a share is diminished,
envy moves the bellows to your sighs.
But if the love of the highest sphere
were to turn your desire upward,
that fear would not be in your breast;
for, by as many as there say 'ours',
so much more of good does each one possess,
and more of charity burns in that cloister".
"I am more hungry to be satisfied",
I said, "than if you had first been silent,
and more of doubt I gather in my mind.
How can it be that a good, distributed
among more possessors, makes them richer
in it than if it is possessed by few?".
And he to me: "Because you fix
your mind only on earthly things,
from true light you pluck darkness.
That infinite and ineffable good
that is there above, so runs to love
as a ray of light comes to a shining body.
It gives so much as it finds of ardor;
so that, however far charity extends,
the eternal worth increases over it.
And the more people up there who understand,
the more there are to love well, and the more love there is,
and like a mirror one gives back to the other.
And if my reasoning does not satisfy your hunger,
you will see Beatrice, and she fully
will take from you this and every other craving.
Strive, then, that soon may be extinguished,
as are the two already, the five wounds
which are closed up by being sorrowful".
As I wished to say 'You satisfy me',
I saw myself arrived on the other circle,
so that my eager eyes made me fall silent.
There it seemed to me in a vision
ecstatic to be suddenly drawn,
and to see in a temple several people;
and a lady, at the entrance, with the gesture
sweet of a mother saying: "My son,
why have you acted thus toward us?
Behold, grieving, your father and I
were searching for you." And as she here fell silent,
that which appeared before, disappeared.
Then another appeared to me with those waters
down her cheeks that grief distills
when it is born of great scorn from another,
and saying: "If you are lord of the city
for whose name there was such strife among the gods,
and from which every science sparkles,
avenge yourself on those bold arms
that embraced our daughter, O Pisistratus."
And the lord seemed to me, benign and mild,
to answer her with a temperate face:
"What shall we do to one who wishes us ill,
if he who loves us is by us condemned?"
Then I saw people kindled in the fire of wrath
with stones slay a young man, loudly
shouting to one another: "Kill, kill!"
And I saw him sinking, because of death
that was already weighing him down, toward the earth,
but of his eyes he always made gates to heaven,
praying to the high Lord, in such strife,
that he forgive his persecutors,
with that look that unlocks pity.
When my soul returned outward
to the things that are true outside of it,
I recognized my not-false errors.
My leader, who could see me
acting like a man who frees himself from sleep,
said: “What is it that you cannot hold yourself up,
but have come more than half a league
veiling your eyes and with your legs tangled,
like one whom wine or sleep overcomes?”
“O my sweet father, if you will listen to me,
I will tell you,” I said, “what appeared to me
when my legs were so taken from me.”
And he: “If you had a hundred masks
upon your face, your thoughts, however small,
would not be hidden from me.
What you saw was so you have no excuse
from opening your heart to the waters of peace
that are poured out from the eternal fountain.
I did not ask ‘What is wrong?’ as one does
who looks only with the eye that does not see,
when the body lies unanimated;
but I asked to give strength to your foot:
thus it is necessary to spur on the lazy, who are slow
to use their waking hours when they return.”
We were walking through the evening, attentive
beyond how far the eyes could stretch
against the late and shining rays.
And behold, little by little a smoke began to form
toward us, as dark as the night;
and there was no place to take shelter from it.
This took from us our eyes and the pure air.
