The dark of Hell and of a night deprived
of every planet, under a poor sky,
as much as it can be by clouds obscured,
did not make for my face so thick a veil
as did that smoke which covered us there,
nor was it of a fiber so harsh to feel,
that the eye could not bear to stay open;
wherefore my wise and faithful escort
drew near me and offered me his shoulder.
Just as a blind man goes behind his guide
so as not to get lost and not to bump
into something that might harm, or perhaps kill him,
so I went through the bitter and foul air,
listening to my leader who kept saying:
“See that you are not cut off from me.”
I heard voices, and each one seemed
to pray for peace and for mercy
to the Lamb of God who takes away sins.
Only ‘Agnus Dei’ were their opening words;
one word was in them all and one melody,
so that among them seemed every concord.
“Are those spirits, master, that I hear?”
I said. And he to me: “You apprehend truly,
and they go loosening the knot of wrath.”
“Now who are you that cleaves our smoke,
and speak of us just as if you still
partitioned time according to the calends?”
Thus was it said by a single voice;
wherefore my master said: “Answer,
and ask if from here one goes upward.”
And I: “O creature who are cleansing yourself
to return beautiful to Him who made you,
you will hear a marvel, if you attend me.”
“I will follow you as far as is allowed me,”
he replied; “and if smoke does not let us see,
hearing will keep us joined in its stead.”
Then I began: “With that wrapping
which death dissolves I go upward,
and I came here through the infernal anguish.
And if God has so enclosed me in His grace
that He wishes me to see His court
in a manner wholly outside modern custom,
do not hide from me who you were before death,
but tell me, and tell me if I go right for the passage;
and your words shall be our escorts.”
“I was a Lombard, and I was called Marco;
I knew the world, and I loved that worth
at which everyone now has unbent the bow.
To go upward, you are going straight.”
Thus he replied, and added: “I pray you
that you pray for me when you are up above.”
And I to him: “By faith I bind myself to you
to do what you ask of me; but I am bursting
with a doubt, if I do not unburden myself of it.
At first it was simple, and now it is made double
by your statement, which makes me certain
here, and elsewhere, of that to which I pair it.
The world is indeed so all deserted
of every virtue, as you declare to me,
and of malice pregnant and covered;
but I pray you point out the cause to me,
so that I may see it and show it to others;
for one places it in heaven, and one here below.”
A deep sigh, which grief compressed into an “oh!”,
he first let out; and then began: “Brother,
the world is blind, and you indeed come from it.
You who are living place every cause
only up in heaven, just as if everything
moved with it by necessity.
If that were so, in you would be destroyed
free will, and there would be no justice
for good to have joy, and for evil, grief.
The heavens initiate your movements;
I do not say all, but, suppose I say it,
light is given to you for good and for malice,
and free will; which, if it endures fatigue
in its first battles with the heavens,
then conquers all, if it is well nourished.
To a greater force and to a better nature
you, free, are subject; and that one creates
the mind in you, which the heavens do not have in their care.
Therefore, if the present world goes astray,
in you is the cause, in you let it be sought;
and of this I shall now be a true informant for you.
It comes forth from the hand of Him who delights in it
before it is, in the guise of a little girl
who, weeping and laughing, plays childishly,
the simple little soul that knows nothing,
except that, moved by a happy maker,
it willingly turns to that which delights it.
Of a small good it first feels the taste;
there it is deceived, and runs after it,
if guide or rein does not turn its love.
Whence it was necessary to place law as a rein;
it was necessary to have a king, who could discern
at least the tower of the true city.
The laws exist, but who puts a hand to them?
No one, because the shepherd who precedes,
can ruminate, but does not have cloven hooves;
wherefore the people, who see their guide
strike only at that good of which they are greedy,
feed on that, and ask for nothing more.
You can well see that the bad guidance
is the cause that has made the world wicked,
and not nature that is corrupt in you.
Rome, which made the world good, used to have
two suns, which made visible both roads,
that of the world and that of God.
The one has extinguished the other; and the sword is joined
with the pastoral staff, and the one with the other
by sheer force must of necessity go ill;
because, joined, the one does not fear the other:
if you do not believe me, pay mind to the ear of grain,
for every plant is known by its seed.
In the land that the Adige and Po water,
valor and courtesy used to be found,
before Federigo had his struggle;
now anyone can securely pass through there
who for shame has forsworn
speaking with the good or approaching them.
Indeed there are still three old men in whom
the ancient age reproaches the new, and it seems long to them
that God should recall them to a better life:
Currado da Palazzo and the good Gherardo
and Guido da Castel, who is better named,
in the French manner, the simple Lombard.
Say henceforth that the Church of Rome,
by confounding in itself two governments,
falls in the mud, and befouls itself and its burden.”
“O my Marco,” I said, “you argue well;
and now I discern why from the inheritance
the sons of Levi were excluded.
But which Gherardo is he whom you, as a sample,
say has remained of the vanished people,
as a reproach to the savage age?”
“Either your speech deceives me, or it is tempting me,”
he answered me; “for, speaking Tuscan to me,
it seems you have heard nothing of the good Gherardo.
By other surname I do not know him,
unless I were to take it from his daughter Gaia.
God be with you, for I come with you no farther.
See the brightness that through the smoke already
shines white, and I must depart
(the angel is there) before I appear to him.”
Thus he turned back, and would hear me no more.
