The high doctor had put an end to his reasoning and attentively he was watching in my face if I seemed content; and I, whom a new thirst still prodded, was silent without, and within I said: 'Perhaps the too much questioning I do burdens him'. But that true father, who had perceived the timid wish that did not open itself, by speaking, gave me the courage to speak. Whence I: «Master, my sight is so enlivened in your light, that I discern clearly all that your reason divides or describes. Therefore I pray you, sweet dear father, that you explain to me love, to which you trace every good action and its contrary». «Direct», he said, «toward me the sharp lights of the intellect, and it will be manifest to you the error of the blind who make themselves guides. The mind, which is created quick to love, is movable to everything that pleases, as soon as it is roused to action by pleasure. Your apprehensive faculty from a real being draws an impression, and unfolds it within you, so that it makes the mind turn to it; and if, turned, toward it the mind inclines, that inclination is love, that is nature which through pleasure is bound anew within you. Then, as fire moves upward through its form which is born to rise to where it longer lasts in its own matter, so the captive mind enters into desire, which is a spiritual motion, and never rests until the beloved thing makes it rejoice. Now it can appear to you how hidden the truth is to the people who affirm that every love is in itself a praiseworthy thing; because perhaps its matter appears always to be good, but not every seal is good, even though the wax be good». «Your words and my attendant intellect», I answered him, «have discovered love to me, but that has made me more pregnant with doubt; for, if love is offered to us from without and the soul goes with no other foot, whether it goes straight or crooked is not its merit». And he to me: «What reason sees here, I can tell you; from there on, expect only Beatrice, for it is a work of faith. Every substantial form, that is separate from matter and is united with it, has a specific virtue gathered in itself, which without operation is not perceived, nor ever shows itself but by effect, as life in a plant by its green leaves. Therefore, whence comes the understanding of the first cognitions, man does not know, and the affection for the first objects of desire, which are in you like the instinct in a bee to make honey; and this first will admits no merit of praise or of blame. Now, so that to this one all others may be gathered, innate in you is the faculty that counsels, and ought to hold the threshold of assent. This is the principle from which is taken the reason of meriting in you, according as it gathers in and winnows good and evil loves. Those who in reasoning went to the foundation, perceived this innate liberty; therefore they left morality to the world. Whence, let us posit that from necessity arises every love that is kindled within you, the power to restrain it is in you. This noble faculty Beatrice understands as free will, and therefore see that you have it in mind, if she undertakes to speak of it».
The moon, almost late at midnight, / made the stars to us appear more sparse, / shaped like a bucket that is all aglow; / and ran against the sky along those paths / that the sun inflames when one from Rome / sees it set between Sardinia and Corsica. / And that gentle shade for whom is named / Pietola more than any Mantuan town, / from my burden had lifted the weight; / for which I, who the reason open and plain / upon my questions had received, / was like a man who drowsily rambles. / But this drowsiness was taken from me / suddenly by people who, from behind / our shoulders, had already turned toward us. / And such as Ismenus once saw and Asopus / along themselves at night a fury and a throng, / whenever the Thebans had need of Bacchus, / so did it curve its step around that circle, / from what I saw of those who came, / whom good will and just love ride. / Soon they were upon us, because running / moved that whole great crowd; / and two in front cried out, weeping: / 'Mary ran with haste to the mountain; / and Caesar, to subdue Ilerda, / struck Marseilles and then ran into Spain.' / 'Quick, quick, that time not be lost / through little love,' cried the others after, / 'for zeal in doing good makes grace green again.' / 'O people in whom keen fervor now / perhaps makes up for the negligence and delay / that you, through lukewarmness, put into doing good, / this one who lives, and surely I do not lie to you, / wishes to go up, as soon as the sun shines for us again; / therefore tell us where the opening is near.' / These were the words of my duke; / and one of those spirits said: 'Come / behind us, and you will find the opening. / We are so full of the will to move, / that we cannot stop; therefore forgive us, / if you take our righteousness for discourtesy. / I was abbot in San Zeno at Verona / under the empire of the good Barbarossa, / of whom Milan still speaks sorrowfully. / And one already has a foot in the grave, / who soon will make that monastery weep, / and will be sad to have had that power; / because his son, ill in his whole body, / and in his mind worse, and who was ill-born, / he has placed in the spot of its true pastor.' / I do not know if he said more or if he fell silent, / so far had he already passed beyond us; / but this I heard, and was pleased to retain it. / And he who was my help in every need / said: 'Turn this way: see two of them / coming, giving sloth a bite.'
Behind all the others they were saying: “First died
the people for whom the sea had opened,
before Jordan saw its heirs.
And those who did not endure the hardship
to the very end with the son of Anchises,
offered themselves to a life without glory.”
Then when those shades were so parted from us
that they could no longer be seen,
a new thought placed itself within me,
from which many others were born, diverse;
and so much from one to another did I stray,
that from my rambling I closed my eyes,
and transformed my thought into a dream.
