In the hour when the day’s heat can no longer
warm the cold of the moon, vanquished by the earth,
and at times by Saturn—
when the geomancers see their Greater Fortune
rise in the east, before the dawn,
by a path that for a short while stays dark for it—,
there came to me in a dream a stammering woman,
cross-eyed, and with twisted feet,
with maimed hands, and of a pallid color.
I was gazing at her; and as the sun comforts
the cold limbs that the night weighs down,
so my gaze made her tongue nimble,
and then straightened her all out
in a short time, and her faded face,
as love desires, it so colored.
After she had her speech so unloosed,
she began to sing so, that with difficulty
would I have turned my attention from her.
“I am,” she sang, “I am the sweet siren,
who bewitches sailors in the middle of the sea;
so full of pleasure am I to hear!
I turned Ulysses from his wandering path
to my song; and he who gets used to me,
rarely departs; so completely do I satisfy him!”
Her mouth was not yet closed again,
when a lady appeared, holy and quick,
beside me, to put that one to confusion.
“O Virgil, Virgil, who is this?”
she said fiercely; and he came
with his eyes fixed only on that honest one.
He seized the other, and in front he opened her,
tearing her garments, and showed me her belly;
that awoke me with the stench that came from it.
I moved my eyes, and the good master: “At least three
voices have I sent you!”, he said, “Arise and come;
let us find the opening through which you may enter.”
I rose up, and all were already full
of the high day, the circles of the sacred mountain,
and we were walking with the new sun at our backs.
Following him, I carried my brow
like one who has it burdened with thought,
who makes of himself a half-arch of a bridge;
when I heard “Come; here one crosses”
spoken in a manner so gentle and benign,
such as is not heard in this mortal march.
With open wings, that seemed a swan’s,
he who so spoke to us turned us upward
between two walls of the hard rock.
He moved his pinions then and fanned us with them,
affirming that ‘They who mourn’ are blessed,
for they shall have their souls possessed of consolation.
“What have you that you still gaze toward the earth?”,
my guide began to say to me,
when we both had climbed a little past the angel.
And I: “With such suspicion a new vision makes me go,
a vision that bends me to itself,
so that I cannot from the thought of it depart.”
“You saw,” he said, “that ancient witch
for whom alone one weeps now up above us;
you saw how man frees himself from her.
Let that suffice you, and strike your heels to earth;
turn your eyes to the lure that the eternal King
spins with the great wheels.”
Like the falcon that first looks down at its feet,
then turns to the call and stretches forward
for the desire of the meal that draws it there,
so did I become; and so, as far as the rock is cleft
to make a way for one who goes up,
I went on to where the circling begins.
When I was ushered into the fifth circle,
I saw people along it who were weeping,
lying on the ground all turned downward.
'Adhaesit pavimento anima mea'
I heard them say with such deep sighs,
that the words could scarcely be understood.
«O elect of God, whose sufferings
both justice and hope make less harsh,
direct us toward the high ascents».
«If you come secure from lying down,
and you want to find the way most quickly,
let your right hands always be on the outside».
Thus prayed the poet, and thus answered
was a little in front of us; for which I,
in the speaking, perceived the one who was hidden,
and I turned my eyes to the eyes of my lord:
wherefore he assented to me with a happy sign
that which the sight of desire was asking.
After I was able to do with myself as I pleased,
I drew myself over that creature
whose words had first made me take note,
saying: «Spirit in whom weeping ripens
that without which one cannot return to God,
suspend for a moment for me your greater care.
Who you were and why you have your backs turned
to the sky, tell me, and if you want me to obtain for you
something from there whence I living moved».
And he to me: «Why heaven turns our backs
to itself, you shall know; but first
know that I was a successor of Peter.
Between Sestri and Chiavari flows down
a beautiful river, and from its name
the title of my blood makes its crest.
For one month and little more I proved how
the great mantle weighs on him who guards it from the mud,
that all other burdens seem a feather.
My conversion, alas!, was late;
but, when I was made the Roman shepherd,
I thus discovered the deceitful life.
I saw that there the heart was not at rest,
nor could one rise higher in that life;
wherefore love for this one was kindled in me.
Until that point a wretched soul and parted
from God was I, completely avaricious;
now, as you see, I am punished for it here.
What avarice does is here declared
in the purgation of the converted souls;
and the mountain has no punishment more bitter.
Just as our eye did not raise itself
on high, fixed on earthly things,
so justice here has plunged it to the earth.
As avarice extinguished our love
for every good, whereby good action was lost,
so justice here holds us constrained,
in the feet and in the hands bound and held;
and for as long as it shall please the just Lord,
so long shall we remain motionless and outstretched».
I had knelt and wished to speak;
but as I began and he became aware,
just by listening, of my reverence,
«What reason», he said, «bent you so downward?».
And I to him: «For your dignity
my conscience rightly pricked me».
«Straighten your legs, get up, brother!»,
he answered; «do not err: I am a fellow-servant
with you and with the others to one power.
If ever you understood that holy evangelical sound
that says ‘Neque nubent’,
you can well see why I reason so.
Go now: I do not want you to stay longer;
for your staying disturbs my weeping,
with which I ripen that which you spoke of.
A niece I have yonder whose name is Alagia,
good in herself, so long as our house
does not make her wicked by its example;
and she alone is left to me on that side».
