Against a better will a will fights poorly;
whence against my pleasure, to please him,
I drew from the water the sponge not yet sated.
I moved on; and my leader moved through the
clear places right along the rock,
as one goes on a wall close to the battlements;
for the people who pour out drop by drop
through their eyes the evil that occupies the whole world,
on the other side press too far outward.
Cursed be you, ancient she-wolf,
who have more prey than all the other beasts
for your endlessly deep hunger!
O heaven, in whose turning it seems to be believed
that conditions down here are transformed,
when will he come through whom this one shall depart?
We went with slow and infrequent steps,
and I attentive to the shades, whom I heard
piteously weeping and lamenting;
and by chance I heard 'Sweet Mary!'
called out before us in a wail
like a woman who is in childbirth;
and it continued: 'You were so poor,
as one can see by that hostelry
where you laid down your holy burden.'
Next I heard: 'O good Fabricius,
with poverty you willed virtue rather
than to possess great wealth with vice.'
These words had so pleased me,
that I drew myself forward to have knowledge
of that spirit from which they seemed to come.
It was still speaking of the generosity
that Nicholas showed to the maidens,
to lead their youth to honor.
'O soul who speaks so well,
tell me who you were,' I said, 'and why you alone
renew these worthy praises.
Your word will not be without reward,
if I return to complete the short path
of that life that flies toward its end.'
And he: “I shall tell you, not for the comfort
that I await from there, but because so much
grace shines in you before you are dead.
I was the root of the evil plant
that shadows the entire Christian land,
so that good fruit is rarely plucked from it.
But if Douai, Lille, Ghent and Bruges
had the power, there would soon be vengeance;
and I ask it of him who judges all.
I was called Hugh Capet over there;
from me are born the Philips and the Louises
by whom France is newly governed.
I was the son of a butcher of Paris:
when the ancient kings came to an end,
all, save one who became a monk in grey robes,
I found the reins of the kingdom’s government
clutched in my hands, and so much power
from new acquisitions, and so full of friends,
that to the widowed crown was promoted
the head of my son, from whom
the consecrated bones of these men began.
As long as the great Provençal dowry
did not take shame away from my blood,
it was of little worth, but still did no evil.
There began with force and with falsehood
its rapine; and then, for amends,
it took Ponthieu and Normandy and Gascony.
Charles came into Italy and, for amends,
made a victim of Conradin; and then
pushed Thomas back to heaven, for amends.
I see a time, not long after today,
that draws another Charles out of France,
to make himself and his own better known.
He comes forth without arms and only with the lance
with which Judas jousted, and he aims it
so that he makes the paunch of Florence burst.
From this not land, but sin and shame
he will gain, so much the heavier for himself,
the more lightly he counts such harm.
The other, who once came ashore a prisoner,
I see selling his daughter and haggling over her
as corsairs do with other female slaves.
O avarice, what more can you do to us,
since you have so drawn my blood to you
that it cares not for its own flesh?
So that the future and the past evil may seem less,
I see the fleur-de-lis enter Anagni,
and in his vicar Christ be captured.
I see him mocked a second time;
I see the vinegar and gall renewed,
and him slain between living thieves.
I see the new Pilate so cruel,
that this does not sate him, but without decree
he bears his greedy sails into the Temple.
O my Lord, when shall I be glad
to see the vengeance that, hidden,
makes your wrath sweet in your secrecy?
That which I was saying of that sole bride
of the Holy Spirit and that made you
turn toward me for some gloss,
is the response to all our prayers
as long as the day lasts; but when night falls,
we take up a contrary sound in its place.
We then repeat Pygmalion,
whom his lust for gold made
a traitor and a thief and a parricide;
and the misery of the avaricious Midas,
which followed on his greedy demand,
for which one must always laugh.
Of the mad Achan each then remembers,
how he stole the spoils, so that the wrath
of Joshua here seems still to bite him.
Then we accuse Sapphira with her husband;
we praise the kicks that Heliodorus received;
and in infamy around the whole mountain circles
Polymestor who murdered Polydorus;
finally it is cried to us: “Crassus,
tell us, for you know: what is the taste of gold?”.
Sometimes one speaks high and another low,
according to the feeling that spurs us to go
now at a greater and now at a lesser pace:
therefore in the good that is spoken of by day,
just now I was not alone; but here nearby
no other person was raising his voice.”
We had already departed from him,
and were striving to cover the road
as much as our power permitted us,
when I felt, like a thing that falls,
the mountain tremble; so that a chill took me
such as usually takes one who goes to his death.
Certainly Delos did not shake so strongly,
before Latona made her nest in it
to give birth to the two eyes of heaven.
Then from all sides a shout began
such that the master turned toward me,
saying: "Do not doubt, while I guide you."
"Gloria in excelsis" all "Deo"
were saying, from what I understood from those nearby,
so that the shout could be understood.
We stood motionless and in suspense
like the shepherds who first heard that song,
until the trembling ceased and it was finished.
Then we took up our holy path again,
watching the shades who lay on the ground,
already returned to their usual weeping.
No ignorance ever with so great a struggle
made me so desirous to know,
if my memory does not err in this,
as the one it seemed to me then, thinking, I had;
nor did I dare to ask because of the hurry,
nor by myself could I see anything there:
thus I went on, timid and pensive.
