The natural thirst that is never sated
if not with the water for which the little woman
of Samaria asked the grace,
was troubling me, and the hurry spurred me
along the encumbered path behind my leader,
and I was grieving at the just vengeance.
And behold, just as Luke writes of it
that Christ appeared to the two who were on the road,
already risen from the sepulchral pit,
a shade appeared to us, and was coming behind us,
from the foot watching the crowd that lies;
nor were we aware of him, until he spoke first,
saying: “O my brothers, may God give you peace.”
We turned around suddenly, and Virgil
returned to him the sign that befits that.
Then he began: “In the blessed council
may the true court place you in peace,
which banishes me to the eternal exile.”
“How so!” he said, and meanwhile we walked on strongly:
“if you are shades whom God above does not deem worthy,
who has escorted you so far up his stair?”
And my master: “If you look at the signs
that this one bears and that the angel traces,
you will see well that with the good it is fitting that he reign.
But because she who spins day and night
had not yet drawn for him from the distaff
that Clotho imposes on each one and prepares,
his soul, which is your and my sister,
coming up, could not come alone,
because it does not see in our way.
Whence I was drawn from the wide throat
of Hell to show him, and I will show him
further, as far as my school will be able to lead him.
But tell me, if you know, why such tremors
the mountain gave just now, and why all at once
it seemed to cry out down to its soft feet.”
Thus he gave me, by asking, through the eye of the needle
of my desire, that just with the hope
my thirst was made less fasting.
He began: “There is nothing that without
order feels the sacred rule
of the mountain, or that is outside of custom.
Free is this place from all alteration:
of that which heaven from itself into itself receives
can there be a cause, and not of anything else.
So that no rain, no hail, no snow,
no dew, no frost falls any higher
than the short little stairway of three steps;
thick clouds appear not, nor thin,
nor lightning, nor the daughter of Thaumas,
who over there often changes her regions;
dry vapor does not rise further
than to the summit of the three steps I spoke of,
where the vicar of Peter has his feet.
It trembles perhaps further down, a little or a lot;
but from wind that is hidden in the earth,
I know not how, up here it has never trembled.
It trembles here when some soul feels itself
cleansed, so that it rises or moves
to climb up; and such a shout follows.
Of the cleansing, only the will makes proof,
which, completely free to change its dwelling,
surprises the soul, and with its will it helps it.
Before, it wills well, but the desire does not let it,
which divine justice, against the will,
as it was for the sin, sets to the torment.
And I, who have lain in this pain
for five hundred years and more, just now felt
a free will for a better threshold:
therefore you felt the earthquake and the pious
spirits throughout the mountain render praise
to that Lord, who may He soon send them upward.”
Thus he told us; and because one enjoys
drinking as much as the thirst is great,
I could not say how much good he did me.
And the wise duke: “Now I see the net
that ensnares you here and how it is unloosed,
why it trembles here and in what you rejoice together.
Now who you were, may it please you that I know,
and why for so many centuries you have lain
here, let me grasp it from your words.”
«In the time that the good Titus, with the help
of the supreme King, avenged the wounds
from which issued the blood by Judas sold,
with the name that most endures and most honors
was I back there,» replied that spirit,
«famous enough, but not yet with faith.
So sweet was my vocal spirit,
that, a Toulousan, Rome drew me to itself,
where I deserved to adorn my temples with myrtle.
Statius the people still name me back there:
I sang of Thebes, and then of the great Achilles;
but I fell on the way with the second burden.
The seeds for my ardor were the sparks,
that warmed me, from the divine flame
by which more than a thousand are lit;
of the Aeneid I speak, which was a mother
to me, and was a nurse to me, in poetizing:
without it I did not fix a dram's weight.
And to have lived back there when
Virgil lived, I would consent to one sun
more than I owe for my release from banishment».
Virgil turned to me with these words,
with a look that, in its silence, said ‘Be silent’;
but the power that wills cannot do all;
for laughter and tears are such close followers
of the passion from which each of them springs,
that they least follow the will in the most truthful.
I only smiled like a man who gives a sign;
at which the shade fell silent, and looked at me
in the eyes where the expression is most fixed;
and “So may you bring such great labor to a good end,”
he said, “why did your face just now
show me a flash of a smile?”.
Now I am caught on one side and the other:
one makes me be silent, the other implores
that I speak; so I sigh, and am understood
by my master, and “Do not be afraid,”
he says to me, “to speak; but speak and tell him
what he asks with such great concern.”
So I: “Perhaps you marvel,
ancient spirit, at the smile I made;
but I want you to be taken with more wonder.
This one who guides my eyes on high,
is that Virgil from whom you took
the strength to sing of men and of gods.
If you believed any other reason for my smile,
leave it as untrue, and believe it to be
those words that you said of him.”
Already he was bending down to embrace the feet
of my teacher, but he said to him: “Brother,
do not, for you are a shade and a shade you see.”
And he, rising: “Now you can comprehend the quantity
of the love that warms me for you,
when I forget our insubstantiality,
treating shades as if they were a solid thing.”
