The angel was already left behind us,
the angel who had turned us to the sixth circle,
having erased from my face one stroke;
and those who have their desire for justice
he had called blessed, and his words
with ‘sitiunt,’ and nothing more, furnished this.
And I, lighter than at the other passages,
was going, so that without any labor
I followed the swift spirits upward;
when Virgil began: «Love,
ignited by virtue, has always ignited another,
if only its flame appeared outwardly;
whence from the hour that among us descended
into the limbo of Hell Juvenal,
who made your affection plain to me,
my benevolence toward you was such
as never bound one to an unseen person,
so that now these stairs will seem short to me.
But tell me, and as a friend forgive me
if too much confidence loosens my rein,
and as a friend now reason with me:
how could avarice find a place
within your breast, among so much wisdom
with which through your own efforts you were filled?».
These words made Statius move
a little to a smile at first; then he replied:
«Every word of yours is a dear sign of love to me.
Truly, things often appear
that give false matter for doubt
because the true reasons are hidden.
Your question makes clear to me your belief
that I was avaricious in the other life,
perhaps because of that circle where I was.
Now know that avarice was set
too far from me, and this excess
thousands of moons have punished.
And if it were not that I set my ways straight,
when I understood that place where you cry out,
as if angered at human nature:
‘Why do you not govern, o sacred hunger
of gold, the appetite of mortals?’,
I would be feeling the grievous jousts by rolling.
Then I realized that our hands could open their wings
too wide in spending, and I repented
of that as well as of my other sins.
How many will rise again with their hair shorn
through ignorance, which from this sin
removes repentance in life and at the end!
And know that the fault which counters
in direct opposition any sin,
dries up its greenness here together with it;
therefore, if I have been among that people
who weep for avarice, to purge myself,
it is for its contrary that I have been placed here».
«Now when you sang of the cruel arms
of the double sorrow of Jocasta»,
said the singer of the bucolic poems,
«from that which Clio there touches on with you,
it does not seem that it had yet made you faithful,
the faith, without which good deeds are not enough.
If that is so, what sun or what candles
so dispelled your darkness, that you then set
your sails to follow the fisherman?».
And he to him: «You first sent me
toward Parnassus to drink in its grottoes,
and you first, next to God, illuminated me.
You did as one who walks by night,
who carries a light behind him and helps not himself,
but makes the people after him wise,
when you said: ‘The age is renewed;
justice returns and the first human age,
and a new progeny descends from heaven.’
Through you I was a poet, through you a Christian:
but so you may see better what I sketch out,
I will stretch out my hand to color it in.
Already the whole world was pregnant
with the true belief, sown
by the messengers of the eternal kingdom;
and your word touched on above
was in harmony with the new preachers;
wherefore I took up the habit of visiting them.
They came then to seem to me so holy,
that, when Domitian persecuted them,
their plaints were not without my tears;
and while I remained on that side,
I helped them, and their righteous customs
made me despise all other sects.
And before I led the Greeks to the rivers
of Thebes in my poetry, I received baptism;
but for fear I was a secret Christian,
for a long time making a show of paganism;
and this lukewarmness made me circle the fourth circle
for more than the fourth century.»
«You, then, who have lifted the cover
that hid from me how much good I speak of,
while for climbing we have time to spare,
tell me where our ancient Terence is,
Caecilius and Plautus and Varro, if you know:
tell me if they are damned, and in what ward».
«These men and Persius and I and many others»,
replied my leader, «are with that Greek
whom the Muses nursed more than any other,
in the first circle of the blind prison;
often we speak of the mountain
that always has our nurses with it.
Euripides is there with us, and Antiphon,
Simonides, Agathon, and many other
Greeks who once adorned their brows with laurel.
There one sees some of your people:
Antigone, Deiphyle, and Argia,
and Ismene, as sad as she once was.
One sees her who pointed out Langia;
there is the daughter of Tiresias, and Thetis,
and with her sisters, Deidamia».
Both the poets now fell silent,
newly attentive to looking around,
free from ascents and from walls;
and already the four handmaidens of the day
were left behind, and the fifth was at the pole,
directing its burning horn straight up,
when my leader said: «I believe that toward the edge
it is fitting for us to turn our right shoulders,
circling the mountain as we are accustomed to do».
Thus custom was our banner there,
and we took the way with less suspicion
because of the assent of that worthy soul.
They went on ahead, and I all alone
behind, and I listened to their discourses,
which gave me understanding of the art of poetry.
But soon the sweet discussions were broken
by a tree we found in the middle of the road,
with fruits that smelled sweet and good;
and as a fir tree tapers upward
from branch to branch, so did that one downward,
I believe, so that no person might climb it.
From the side where our path was closed,
a clear liquid fell from the high rock
and was sprinkled through the leaves above.
The two poets approached the tree;
and a voice from within the foliage
cried out: “Of this food you shall have scarcity.”
Then it said: “Mary thought more of how
the wedding feast might be honorable and complete,
than of her own mouth, which now answers for you.
And the ancient Roman women, for their drink,
were content with water; and Daniel
despised food and acquired wisdom.
The first age, how golden it was,
made acorns savory with hunger,
and every stream nectar with thirst.
Honey and locusts were the foods
that nourished the Baptist in the desert;
for which he is glorious and so great
as is revealed to you by the Gospel.”
