While I was fixing my eyes through the green foliage
just as he is wont to do
who wastes his life in pursuit of little birds,
the more-than-father said to me: «My son,
come along now, for the time that is allotted us
must be partitioned more usefully».
I turned my face, and my steps no less quickly,
behind the sages, who were speaking in such a way,
that they made the walking seem of no cost to me.
And behold, weeping and singing were heard,
‘Labïa mëa, Domine,’ in such a way
that it gave birth to delight and to grief.
«O sweet father, what is that which I hear?»,
I began; and he: «Shades who go
perhaps loosening the knot of their obligation».
Just as thoughtful pilgrims do,
when meeting on the road with people unknown,
who turn to them but do not stop,
so from behind us, moving more quickly,
a silent and devout crowd of souls,
coming and passing by, was marveling at us.
Each one was dark and hollow in the eyes,
pale in the face, and so wasted away
that the skin took its shape from the bones.
I do not believe that to his last shred of skin
Erysichthon was made so dry
by fasting, when he feared it most.
I said to myself while thinking: ‘Behold
the people who lost Jerusalem,
when Mary struck her beak into her son!’
The eye-sockets seemed like rings without gems:
he who reads ‘omo’ in the face of men
would have clearly recognized the M there.
Who would believe that the scent of a fruit
could have such power, generating longing,
and the scent of water, without knowing how?
I was already marveling at what so famished them,
the cause being not yet manifest
of their leanness and their dismal peeling,
and behold, from the depth of his head
a shade turned his eyes to me and stared intently;
then he cried out loudly: «What grace is this to me?».
I never would have recognized him by his face;
but in his voice was made manifest to me
that which his appearance in itself had subdued.
This spark rekindled completely in me
my knowledge of the changed features,
and I recognized the face of Forese.
"Pray, do not fixate on the dry scurf
that discolors," he begged, "my skin,
nor on the lack of flesh that I have;
but tell me the truth of yourself, tell who are those
two souls that there make you an escort;
do not remain without speaking to me!".
"Your face, which I wept for when it was dead,
gives me now no less grief for weeping,"
I answered him, "seeing it so disfigured.
Therefore tell me, for God's sake, what so strips you;
do not make me speak while I am in wonder,
for he speaks ill who is full of another desire".
And he to me: "From the eternal counsel
a power falls into the water and into the plant
left behind, from which I so grow thin.
All these people who, weeping, sing,
for having followed their gluttony beyond measure,
in hunger and in thirst here make themselves holy again.
The desire to drink and to eat is kindled in us
by the scent that comes from the fruit and from the spray
that spreads up over its green foliage.
And not just once, this circuit
circling, is our pain renewed:
I say pain, and I should say solace,
for that same will leads us to the trees
that led Christ gladly to say 'Eli,'
when he liberated us with his own vein".
And I to him: «Forese, from that day
in which you changed worlds for a better life,
five years have not yet turned to this one.
If the power in you to sin more
was finished before the hour of good sorrow
that remarries us to God arrived,
how have you come up here already?
I thought I would find you down below,
where time for time is paid back».
Whence he to me: «So soon has led me
to drink the sweet wormwood of these torments
my Nella with her streaming tears.
With her devout prayers and with sighs
she has drawn me from the slope where one waits,
and has freed me from the other circles.
So much more dear and more beloved to God
is my little widow, whom I loved much,
as in doing good she is more alone;
for the Barbagia of Sardinia is far
more modest in its women
than the Barbagia where I left her.
O sweet brother, what do you want me to say?
A future time is already in my sight,
to which this hour will not be very old,
in which it will be forbidden from the pulpit
to the shameless Florentine women
the going about showing their breasts with their paps.
What barbarian women were there ever, what Saracen women,
for whom it was necessary, to make them go covered,
either spiritual or other disciplines?
But if the shameless ones were certain
of what the swift heaven prepares for them,
already for howling they would have their mouths open;
for, if foresight here does not deceive me,
they will be sad before he grows hair on his cheeks
who now is consoled with a lullaby.
“Ah, brother, now do not hide yourself from me any longer!
you see that not just I, but all these people
are gazing there where you veil the sun.”
So I to him: “If you bring back to mind
what you were with me, and what I was with you,
the present memory will still be grievous.
From that life this one turned me,
who goes before me, the other day, when round
the sister of him showed herself to you,”
and I showed the sun; “this one through the profound
night has led me, of the truly dead,
with this true flesh that follows him.
Thence his comforts have drawn me up,
climbing and circling the mountain
that makes you straight whom the world made crooked.
He says he will be my companion for so long
that I will be there where Beatrice will be;
there it is fitting that I remain without him.
Virgil is this one who so tells me,”
and I pointed to him; “and this other is that shade
for whom a little while ago every slope shook
of your kingdom, which now clears him from itself.”
