Neither the speaking made the walking, nor the walking made it slower,
but talking we went on strongly,
just like a ship pushed by a good wind;
and the shades, that seemed twice-dead things,
through the pits of their eyes drew wonder
from me, having become aware of my being alive.
And I, continuing my speech,
said: «She perhaps goes up more slowly
than she would, for another's sake.
But tell me, if you know, where Piccarda is;
tell me if I see any person of note
among these people that so stare at me».
«My sister, who between beautiful and good
I know not which she was more, triumphs happily
in high Olympus already with her crown».
So he said first; and then: «Here it is not forbidden
to name each one, since our appearance
is so drained away by the diet.
This one», and he pointed with his finger, «is Bonagiunta,
Bonagiunta of Lucca; and that face
beyond him more than the others wasted away
had the Holy Church in his arms:
from Tours he was, and purges by fasting
the eels of Bolsena and the Vernaccia wine».
Many others he named to me one by one;
and at the naming all seemed content,
so that I for that saw not one dark look.
I saw using their teeth on emptiness for hunger
Ubaldin da la Pila and Bonifazio
who with his crozier pastured many people.
I saw Messer Marchese, who had occasion
once to drink at Forlì with less dryness,
and yet was such that he never felt sated.
But as one who looks and then esteems
one more than another, I did to that one from Lucca,
who seemed to have more awareness of me.
He was murmuring; and I know not what 'Gentucca'
I heard there, where he felt the wound
of the justice that so plucks at them.
'O soul,' I said, 'who seems so eager
to speak with me, make it so that I understand you,
and with your speech satisfy both you and me.'
'A woman is born, and does not yet wear a veil,'
he began, 'who will make my city
pleasing to you, however one may reprehend it.
You will go on with this foreseeing:
if you made an error in my murmuring,
the true events will yet make it clear to you.
But tell me if I see here the one who brought forth
the new rhymes, beginning:
'Ladies who have understanding of love.'' 
And I to him: 'I am one who, when
Love inspires me, takes note, and in that manner
that he dictates within, I go setting forth.'
'O brother, now I see,' he said, 'the knot
that held the Notary and Guittone and me
short of the sweet new style that I hear!
I see well how your pens
follow closely behind the dictator,
which certainly did not happen with ours;
and he who sets himself to look further,
sees no more difference from the one style to the other';
and, as if content, he fell silent.
Just as the birds that winter along the Nile,
sometimes in the air form a flock,
then fly more swiftly and go in a line,
so all the crowd that was there,
turning their faces, quickened their pace,
and light through thinness and through will.
And as the man who is tired of trotting
lets his companions go on, and so he walks
until the panting in his chest is vented,
so Forese let the holy flock pass by
and came along behind with me,
saying: 'When will it be that I see you again?'.
'I do not know,' I answered him, 'how long I may live;
but my return will not be so soon
that I am not with my will first at the shore;
because the place where I was put to live
from day to day is stripped more of its good,
and seems destined for a sad ruin.'
'Now go,' he said; 'for he who has most blame for it,
I see dragged at the tail of a beast
toward the valley where sin is never absolved.
The beast at every step goes faster,
always increasing, until it strikes him,
and leaves the body vilely mangled.
Those wheels have not long to turn,'
and he raised his eyes to heaven, 'before what
my speech cannot declare more will be clear to you.
You remain here now; for time is precious
in this kingdom, so that I lose too much
by coming with you thus, side by side.'
As sometimes at a gallop there breaks out
the knight from a riding troop,
and goes to win honor in the first clash,
so he departed from us with greater strides;
and I remained on the path with those two
who were such great marshals in the world.
And when he had gone on ahead of us,
so that my eyes made themselves followers of him,
as my mind did of his words,
the branches of another apple tree appeared to me,
heavy and lively, and not very far away,
for we had only then turned into a bend.
I saw people beneath it raising their hands
and crying out I know not what toward the leaves,
like yearning and futile little children
who beg, and the one begged does not answer,
but, to make their desire truly sharp,
holds high their desire and does not hide it.
Then they departed as if undeceived;
and we now came to the great tree
that refuses so many prayers and tears.
«Pass beyond without coming near:
higher up is a wood that was bitten by Eve,
and this plant was raised from it».
Thus from among the leaves I know not who was speaking;
wherefore Virgil and Statius and I, drawn close together,
went onward from the side that rises.
«Remember», it was saying, «the accursed ones
formed in the clouds, who, sated,
fought Theseus with their double chests;
and of the Hebrews who in drinking showed themselves soft,
for which Gideon did not want them as companions,
when toward Midian he descended the hills».
Thus, keeping close to one of the two edges,
we passed, hearing of sins of the throat
followed in the past by wretched gains.
Then, spread out along the lonely road,
a good thousand paces and more carried us onward,
each one contemplating without a word.
«What are you three thinking of, so alone?».
a sudden voice said; at which I started
as do beasts that are frightened and sluggish.
I raised my head to see who it was;
and never in a furnace were there seen
glass or metals so shining and red,
as I saw one who said: «If it pleases you
to mount upward, here one must turn;
this way goes he who wishes to go for peace».
His appearance had taken away my sight;
for which I turned behind my teachers,
like a man who goes according to what he hears.
And as, announcer of the dawns,
the May breeze moves and gives off its scent,
all impregnated with the grass and flowers;
so I felt a wind strike the middle of
my forehead, and I clearly felt the wing move,
which made me feel the scent of ambrosia.
And I heard it said: «Blessed are they whom so much
grace illumines, that the love of taste
does not smoke up too much desire in their breast,
hungering always for what is just!».
