Now was the hour when the climb wished for no delay;
for the sun had left the meridian circle
to Taurus and the night to Scorpio:
wherefore, as a man does who does not stop
but goes on his way, whatever appears to him,
if the spur of need pierces him,
so we entered through the narrow pass,
one before the other taking the stair
that for its narrowness un-pairs the climbers.
And like the little stork that lifts its wing
with the desire to fly, and does not dare
to abandon the nest, and lets it fall again;
such was I with a desire kindled and quenched
to ask, coming up to the very act
that he makes who prepares himself to speak.
He did not let it pass, though the going was swift,
my sweet father, but said: “Shoot
the bow of speech, which you have drawn to the iron.”
Then I confidently opened my mouth
and began: “How can one become lean
there where the need for nourishment does not touch?”
“If you would recall how Meleager
was consumed as a firebrand was consumed,
this would not be,” he said, “for you so harsh;
and if you thought how, at your flicker,
your image flickers inside the mirror,
what seems hard would seem to you flimsy.
But so that you may rest easy in your desire,
here is Statius; and I call him and pray
that he be now the healer of your wounds.”
“If I unfold to him the eternal view,”
replied Statius, “in your presence,
let my inability to refuse you be my excuse.”
Then he began: “If my words, my son,
your mind watches and receives,
light I will make for you on the ‘how’ that you ask.
Perfect blood, which is not drunk
by the thirsty veins, and which remains
like nourishment that you remove from the table,
takes in the heart for all human members
an informative virtue, like that blood
which goes to make them through the flowing veins.
Digested yet again, it descends to where it is more beautiful
to be silent than to speak; and from there it then distills
over another’s blood in the natural vessel.
There the one and the other are joined together,
the one disposed to be passive, the other to be active
because of the perfect place from which it is pressed;
and, having reached it, it begins to operate,
first coagulating, and then giving life to
that which for its matter it made solid.
The active virtue having become a soul
like that of a plant, different in this:
that this one is on its way and that one is already at the shore,
it then works so far that it now moves and feels,
like a sea-sponge; and from there it undertakes
to organize the powers of which it is the seed.
Now unfolds, my son, now extends
the virtue that comes from the begetter’s heart,
where nature intends for all the members.
But how from an animal it becomes a speaker,
you do not see yet: this is a point
that made one wiser than you err in the past,
so that in his doctrine he made separate
from the soul the possible intellect,
because he saw no organ assumed by it.
Open your breast to the truth that is coming;
and know that, as soon as in the fetus
the articulation of the brain is perfect,
the First Mover turns to it with joy
over such great art of nature, and breathes
a new spirit, replete with virtue,
which pulls what it finds active there
into its own substance, and becomes a single soul,
that lives and feels and on itself revolves.
And so that you may marvel less at my word,
look at the sun’s heat that becomes wine,
when joined to the humor that drips from the vine.
When Lachesis no longer has the thread,
it is loosed from the flesh, and in potential
it carries with it both the human and the divine:
the other powers all of them are mute;
memory, intelligence, and will
in act much sharper than before.
Without resting, by itself it falls
wondrously to one of the shores;
there it first learns its destined paths.
As soon as a place there circumscribes it,
the formative power radiates around
just as and as much as in the living limbs.
And as the air, when it is quite damp,
through another’s ray that is reflected in it,
becomes adorned with different colors;
so the neighboring air there is impressed
into that form which is sealed in it
virtually by the soul that has come to rest;
and then, like the small flame
that follows the fire wherever it moves,
its new form follows the spirit.
Because from this it then has its appearance,
it is called a shade; and from this it then forms organs
for every sense, all the way to sight.
From this we speak and from this we laugh;
from this we make the tears and the sighs
that you may have heard throughout the mountain.
According to how desires and other feelings
afflict us, the shade takes its form;
and this is the reason for what you marvel at».
And already come to the last torture
had we, and turned to the right hand,
and we were attentive to another care.
Here the bank shoots flame outward,
and the terrace breathes a wind upward
that reflects it and keeps it separate from itself;
so we had to go on the open side
one by one; and I feared the fire
on this side, and on that feared to fall below.
My leader said: “Through this place
one must keep a tight rein on the eyes,
because one could go astray for very little.”
‘Summae Deus clementiae’ in the heart
of the great burning I then heard being sung,
which made me no less eager to turn;
and I saw spirits walking through the flame;
for which I looked at them and at my steps,
dividing my sight from time to time.
After the end that is made to that hymn,
they cried out loud: ‘Virum non cognosco’;
then they began the hymn again softly.
Having finished it, they cried again: “To the woods
Diana kept, and she drove out Helice
who had felt the poison of Venus.”
Then to their song they returned; then women
they cried, and husbands, who were chaste
as virtue and matrimony impose.
And this method I believe is enough for them
for all the time that the fire burns them:
with such treatment and with such sustenance
the final wound must be stitched up.
