While thus along the edge, one before another,
we went our way, and often the good master
said to me: “Watch: it helps that I make you wary”;
the sun was striking me on the right shoulder,
which now, with its rays, all the west
was changing to a white aspect from azure;
and I with my shadow made the flame appear
more burning; and just at this one sign
I saw many shades, as they went, take heed.
This was the cause that gave a start
to their speaking of me; and they began
to say: “That one does not seem a fictitious body”;
then toward me, as much as they were able,
certain ones made their way, always with care
not to exit where they would not be burned.
“O you who go, not for being more slow,
but perhaps reverent, behind the others,
answer me, who in thirst and in fire burn.
Nor to me alone is your answer needed;
for all of these have a greater thirst for it
than for cold water an Indian or Ethiopian.
Tell us how it is that you make of yourself a wall
to the sun, just as if you had not yet
entered within the net of death.”
Thus one of them spoke to me; and I would have
already revealed myself, had I not been intent
on another novelty that then appeared;
for through the middle of the burning path
came people with their faces toward these,
which made me gaze, suspended.
There I see on every side each shade
make haste and kiss one another
without stopping, content with a brief festivity;
so within their dark troop
one ant touches snout with another,
perhaps to ask of their way and their fortune.
As soon as they part from the friendly welcome,
before the first step there runs its course,
each one strives to outcry:
the new people: “Sodom and Gomorrah”;
and the other: “Into the cow enters Pasiphaë,
so that the bull may run to her lust.”
Then, like cranes that to the Rhipaean mountains
might fly in part, and in part toward the sands,
these shy of the frost, those of the sun,
the one people goes away, the other comes;
and they return, weeping, to their first chants
and to the cry that most befits them;
and they drew near to me again, as before,
the very same ones who had entreated me,
attentive to listen in their appearance.
I, who had twice seen their desire,
began: “O souls, certain
of having, whenever it may be, a state of peace,
my limbs have not remained unripe or mature
on that side, but are here with me
with their blood and with their joints.
From here I go up so as to be blind no more;
a lady is above who acquires grace for me,
for which I carry the mortal through your world.
But may your greatest desire be satisfied
soon, so that heaven may house you
which is full of love and most amply spreads,
tell me, so that I may yet write pages of it,
who are you, and who is that crowd
that goes away behind your backs.”
Not otherwise does the mountaineer become stupidly confused
and staring fall silent,
when rough and savage he enters the city,
than each shade did in its appearance;
but after they were unburdened of their stupor,
which in high hearts is soon calmed,
«Blessed are you, who from our marches»,
began again she who first questioned me,
«to die better, gather experience!
The people who do not come with us offended
with that for which Caesar, once triumphing,
heard ‘Queen’ cried out against himself:
therefore they depart crying ‘Sodom,’
reproaching themselves as you have heard,
and they aid the burning with their shame.
Our sin was hermaphrodite;
but because we did not observe human law,
following appetite like beasts,
to our disgrace, by us is recited,
when we depart, the name of her
who made herself a beast in the beast-like framework.
Now you know our deeds and of what we were guilty:
if perhaps by name you want to know who we are,
there is not time to say, and I could not.
I will surely satisfy your wish concerning me:
I am Guido Guinizzelli, and I purge myself now
for having grieved well before the end».
As in the grief of Lycurgus
two sons became on seeing their mother again,
such I became, but I do not rise to such a height,
when I hear him name himself, the father
of me and of my other betters who ever
used sweet and graceful rhymes of love;
and without hearing or speaking, pensive, I went on
for a long time gazing at him,
nor, for the fire, did I draw any closer.
After I was sated with gazing,
I offered myself entirely ready for his service
with an oath that makes others believe.
And he to me: “You leave such a trace,
from what I hear, in me, and so clear,
that Lethe cannot take it or make it dim.
But if your words just now swore truth,
tell me what is the reason why you show
in speech and in look that you hold me dear.”
And I to him: “Your sweet sayings,
which, as long as modern usage lasts,
will make their inks still precious.”
“O brother,” he said, “this one whom I point out to you
with my finger,” and he indicated a spirit ahead,
“was a better craftsman of the mother tongue.
Verses of love and prose of romance
he surpassed all; and let the fools talk
who believe that he of Limoges surpasses.
To rumor more than to truth they turn their faces,
and thus they fix their opinion
before art or reason is heard by them.
Thus did many of old with Guittone,
from cry to cry still giving him the prize,
until the truth, with more people, has vanquished him.
Now if you have so ample a privilege,
that it is licit for you to go to the cloister
in which Christ is abbot of the college,
say for me a word of a pater noster,
as much as is needed by us of this world,
where the power to sin is no longer ours.”
Then, perhaps to give place to another nearby
whom he had near him, he disappeared through the fire,
as through the water a fish going to the bottom.
I moved a little toward the one pointed out before,
and said that for his name my desire
was preparing a gracious place.
He began freely to say:
“Your courteous request so pleases me,
that I cannot nor do I wish to hide myself from you.
I am Arnaut, who weeps and goes singing;
grieving I see the past folly,
and see with joy the joy I await, ahead.
Now I pray you, by that Power
that guides you to the top of the stairway,
be mindful in due time of my pain!”
Then he hid himself in the fire that refines them.
