Eager now to search within and around
the divine forest, thick and living,
that to my eyes tempered the new day,
without more waiting, I left the bank,
taking to the plain slowly, slowly
over the ground that from every part was fragrant.
A sweet breeze, without mutation
having in itself, struck me on the forehead
with no more of a blow than a gentle wind;
because of which the leaves, trembling, readily
all of them bent toward the part
where the holy mountain casts its first shadow;
not, however, from their upright state diverted
so much that the little birds in the treetops
would cease to practice all their arts;
but with full gladness the morning hours,
singing, they received among the leaves,
which kept a bass note to their rhymes,
such as from branch to branch is gathered
through the pine forest on the shore of Chiassi,
when Aeolus unleashes the sirocco.
Already my slow steps had transported me
so far into the ancient forest that I
could no longer see back to where I had entered;
and behold, a stream took from me further passage,
which toward the left with its little waves
bent the grass that grew upon its bank.
All the waters that on this side are most pure,
would seem to have some mixture in themselves
compared to that one, which conceals nothing,
although it moves darkly dark
beneath the perpetual shade, which never
lets sun or moon shine their rays there.
With my feet I stopped and with my eyes I passed
beyond the little river, to admire
the great variety of the fresh boughs;
and there appeared to me, even as appears
suddenly a thing that turns aside
through wonder every other thought,
a lady all alone, who went along
singing and selecting flower from flower
with which her whole path was painted.
“Ah, beautiful lady, who at the rays of love
warm yourself, if I am to believe the looks
that are accustomed to be witness of the heart,
may it please you to draw yourself forward,”
I said to her, “toward this bank,
so that I may understand what you are singing.
You make me remember where and what she was,
Proserpina, at the time her mother
lost her, and she the springtime.”
As turns, with feet close-pressed
to the ground and each other, a lady who dances,
and places one foot scarce before the other,
she turned upon the crimson and the yellow
little flowers toward me, not otherwise
than a virgin who casts down her honest eyes;
and she made my prayers be satisfied,
drawing herself so near, that the sweet sound
came to me with its meanings.
As soon as she was there where the grasses are
already bathed by the waves of the beautiful river,
she did me the gift of lifting up her eyes.
I do not believe there shone so much light
beneath the lashes of Venus, when pierced
by her son against all her custom.
She was smiling from the opposite bank,
arranging many colors with her hands,
which the high land puts forth without seed.
Three paces the river made us distant;
but the Hellespont, there where Xerxes passed,
still a curb to all human prides,
suffered no more hatred from Leander
for surging between Sestos and Abydos,
than that one from me, because it did not open then.
“You are new, and perhaps because I laugh,”
she began, “in this chosen place,
made for human nature as its nest,
your marveling holds you in some suspicion;
but the psalm *Delectasti* gives light,
which can dispel the fog from your intellect.
And you who are in front and entreated me,
say if you wish to hear more; for I came ready
for your every question, as much as will suffice.”
“The water,” I said, “and the sound of the forest
challenge within me a new-found belief
about a thing I heard contrary to this.”
Wherefore she: “I shall tell how proceeds
for its cause that which makes you wonder,
and I will purge the mist that strikes you.
The highest Good, who is pleased only in Himself,
made man good and for goodness, and this place
He gave to him as a pledge of eternal peace.
Through his own fault he dwelt here little time;
through his own fault for weeping and for toil
he exchanged honest laughter and sweet sport.
So that the turbulence that down below is made
by the exhalations of the water and the earth,
which follow after the heat as best they can,
should not make any war upon man,
this mountain rose so high toward the sky,
and is free from it from there where it is gated.
Now because in a circuit all of
the air turns with the first revolution,
if its circle is not broken on any side,
on this height which is completely free
in the living air, such motion strikes,
and makes the forest sound because it is dense;
and the stricken plant has so much power,
that with its virtue it impregnates the breeze
and that, in turn, revolving, shakes it round;
and the other earth, according to its worthiness
in itself and by its sky, conceives and bears
from diverse virtues diverse kinds of trees.
It would not then seem a marvel down there,
this having been heard, when some plant
without a visible seed takes root there.
And you should know that the holy plain
where you are, is full of every seed,
and has fruit in it that is not plucked down there.
The water that you see does not rise from a spring
that vapor, which the cold condenses, restores,
like a river that gains and loses its vigor;
but issues from a fount, constant and sure,
which from the will of God regains as much
as it pours forth, open on two sides.
On this side it descends with a power
that takes from one the memory of sin;
on the other, it restores that of every good deed.
Here Lethe; so on the other side
it is called Eunoë, and it does not work
if here and there it is not first tasted:
this is above all other flavors.
And although your thirst may be quite sated
though I reveal to you no more,
I will give you a corollary still, as a grace;
nor do I think my words will be less dear to you,
if they extend with you beyond my promise.
Those who in ancient times wrote poetry about
the age of gold and its happy state,
perhaps on Parnassus dreamed of this place.
Here the human root was innocent;
here is always spring and every fruit;
this is the nectar of which each one speaks.”
I turned myself then completely around
to my poets, and I saw that with a smile
they had heard the final exposition;
then to the beautiful lady I turned back my face.
