Singing like a woman in love,
she continued with the end of her words:
‘Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata!’.
And like nymphs who went alone
through the savage shades, desiring
some to see, some to flee the sun,
then she moved against the river, going
up along the bank; and I parallel to her,
following small step with small step.
There were not a hundred between her steps and mine,
when the banks equally made a turn,
so that toward the east I was turned.
Nor yet was our way thus very long,
when the lady turned herself completely to me,
saying: “My brother, look and listen.”
And behold a sudden brightness ran
from all parts through the great forest,
such that of lightning it put me in doubt.
But because lightning, as it comes, ceases,
and that, enduring, shone more and more,
in my thought I said: ‘What thing is this?’.
And a sweet melody was running
through the luminous air; whence good zeal
made me blame the audacity of Eve,
who there where earth and heaven obeyed,
a woman, alone and just now formed,
did not suffer to stay beneath any veil;
under which if she had been devout,
I would have those ineffable delights
felt sooner and for a longer time.
While I was going among so many first fruits
of the eternal pleasure, completely rapt,
and desirous still for more joys,
before us, just like an ignited fire,
the air beneath the green branches became;
and the sweet sound as songs was now understood.
O sacrosanct Virgins, if hungers,
colds or vigils I ever suffered for you,
a reason spurs me to call on you for reward.
Now it is fitting that Helicon pour forth for me,
and that Urania aid me with her choir
to put into verse things difficult to conceive.
A little further on, seven golden trees
were falsified in appearance by the long stretch
of the space that was still between us and them;
but when I had come so close to them
that the common object, which deceives the sense,
did not through distance lose any of its properties,
the faculty that furnishes discourse to reason
apprehended them to be candelabra,
and in the voices of the singing, ‘Hosanna’.
Above flamed the beautiful equipment,
far brighter than the moon in a clear sky
at midnight in the middle of her month.
I turned around, full of admiration,
to the good Virgil, and he answered me
with a look no less laden with amazement.
Then I returned my gaze to the high things
that were moving toward us so slowly
they would have been outpaced by new brides.
The lady scolded me: “Why do you burn
so in the affection for the living lights,
and not watch that which comes behind them?”.
People I saw then, as if following their leaders,
coming after, dressed in white;
and such whiteness was never on this side.
The water was taking from my left flank,
and gave back to me my left side,
if I looked in it, like a mirror also.
When on my bank I had such a position
that only the river made me distant,
to see better I gave a halt to my steps,
and I saw the little flames go before,
leaving the air behind them painted,
and they had the semblance of drawn brushstrokes;
so that up there remained distinct
seven stripes, all in those colors
with which the Sun makes his bow and Delia her girdle.
These banners stretched further behind
than my sight; and, as far as I could judge,
the outer ones were ten paces apart.
Under such a beautiful sky as I describe,
twenty-four elders, two by two,
came crowned with fleurs-de-lis.
All were singing: “Blessed art thou
among the daughters of Adam, and blessed
be your beauties eternally!”.
After the flowers and the other fresh grasses
opposite me on the other bank
were free from that chosen people,
just as light follows light in the heavens,
there came after them four animals,
each one crowned with green leaves.
Each one was feathered with six wings;
the feathers full of eyes; and the eyes of Argus,
if they were alive, would be such as these.
To describe their forms I do not scatter more
rhymes, reader; for another expense constrains me,
so much that on this I cannot be generous;
but read Ezekiel, who depicts them
as he saw them from the cold region
coming with wind and with cloud and with fire;
and as you will find them in his pages,
such they were here, except that for the wings
John is with me and from him it departs.
The space within the four of them contained
a chariot, on two wheels, triumphal,
which came drawn by the neck of a griffin.
It extended upward its one and its other wing
between the middle and the three and three bands,
so that in splitting them, it did harm to none.
They rose so high that they were not seen;
its limbs were of gold where it was a bird,
and the others white, mixed with vermilion.
Not only did Rome with a chariot so beautiful
not gladden Africanus, or truly Augustus,
but that of the Sun would be poor beside it;
that of the Sun which, swerving, was burnt up
by the prayer of the devout Earth,
when Jupiter was mysteriously just.
Three ladies in a circle by the right wheel
came dancing; the one so red
that she would scarcely be noted in the fire;
the other was as if her flesh and bones
had been made of emerald;
the third seemed like newly fallen snow;
and now they seemed led by the white one,
now by the red; and from the song of this last
the others took their steps both slow and fast.
At the left, four made a festival,
clothed in purple, following the measure
of one of them who had three eyes in her head.
After all the aforementioned group
I saw two old men in dissimilar dress,
but equal in their mien, both honest and firm.
The one showed himself as one of the familiars
of that supreme Hippocrates whom nature
made for the animals that she holds most dear;
the other showed the contrary concern
with a sword, shining and sharp,
such that on this side of the stream it made me afraid.
Then I saw four of humble appearance;
and behind them all a single old man
come, sleeping, with a sharp-witted face.
And these seven with the first company
were attired, but not with a garland of lilies
around their heads did they make a garden,
but rather of roses and other vermilion flowers;
a gaze from not far off would have sworn
that they all burned from above the eyebrows.
And when the chariot was opposite me,
a thunder was heard, and those worthy people
seemed to have their progress further forbidden,
halting there with the foremost banners.
