When the Septentrion of the first heaven,
which never knew a setting nor a rising
nor a veil of any mist but that of sin,
and which there made each one aware
of his own duty, as the lower one makes
one who turns the helm to come to port,
had fixed itself motionless: the truthful people,
who had come first between the griffin and it,
turned to the chariot as to their peace;
and one of them, as if sent from heaven,
‘Veni, sponsa, de Libano,’ singing,
cried out three times, and all the others after.
As the blessed at the final summons
will rise up ready each one from his cavern,
hallelujahs in their regarmented voice,
so upon the divine chariot
a hundred rose, ad vocem tanti senis,
ministers and messengers of eternal life.
All were saying: ‘Benedictus qui venis!’,
and scattering flowers upward and all around,
‘Manibus, oh, date lilïa plenis!’.
I have seen before, at the beginning of the day,
the eastern part all rosy,
and the rest of the sky adorned with beautiful serenity;
and the face of the sun be born shaded,
so that through a tempering of vapors
the eye could bear it for a long time:
so within a cloud of flowers
that from the angelic hands was rising
and falling back down within and without,
upon a white veil, girt with olive,
a lady appeared to me, under a green mantle,
clothed in the color of living flame.
And my spirit, which for so long a time
had been in her presence,
and had not been, trembling, overcome with stupor,
without having more knowledge from the eyes,
through a hidden virtue that moved from her,
felt the great power of the old love.
As soon as on my sight there struck
the high virtue that had already pierced me
before I had passed out of boyhood,
I turned to the left with the confidence
with which a little boy runs to his mamma
when he is afraid or when he is afflicted,
to say to Virgil: ‘Less than a dram
of blood is left in me that does not tremble:
I know the signs of the ancient flame’.
But Virgil had left us deprived
of himself, Virgil, sweetest father,
Virgil, to whom I gave myself for my salvation;
nor did all that the ancient mother lost
avail my cheeks, cleansed of dew,
that, weeping, they did not turn dark again.
«Dante, because Virgil goes away,
do not weep yet, do not weep yet;
for you must weep for another sword».
Like an admiral who on the poop and prow
comes to see the crew that serves
on the other ships, and encourages them to do well;
on the left bank of the chariot,
when I turned at the sound of my own name,
which of necessity is registered here,
I saw the lady who first appeared to me
veiled beneath the angelic festival,
direct her eyes toward me from across the river.
Although the veil that fell from her head,
encircled by the leaves of Minerva,
did not let her appear manifest,
regally, in her bearing, still stern,
she continued like one who speaks
and saves the warmest speech for last:
«Look at me well! I am, indeed, I am Beatrice.
How did you deign to ascend the mountain?
Did you not know that here man is happy?».
My eyes fell down into the clear fount;
but seeing myself in it, I drew them to the grass,
so great a shame weighed down my brow.
So does the mother seem proud to her son,
as she seemed to me; because with bitterness
tastes the flavor of acerbic pity.
She fell silent; and the angels sang
suddenly ‘In te, Domine, speravi’;
but beyond ‘pedes meos’ they did not pass.
Just as the snow among the living timbers
on the back of Italy is frozen,
buffed and packed by Slavic winds,
then, liquified, trickles into itself,
as long as the land that loses shadow breathes,
so that it seems a candle melting in the fire;
so was I without tears and sighs
before the song of those who always note
their music to the eternal spheres;
but when I heard in their sweet harmonies
their compassion for me, as if they had said:
‘Lady, why do you so unmake him?’,
the ice that was constricted round my heart
became spirit and water, and with anguish
from my mouth and from my eyes it issued from my breast.
She, still firm on the said flank
of the chariot standing, to the pious substances
turned her words thus afterward:
«You keep watch in the eternal day,
so that neither night nor sleep steals from you
a step the age makes on its ways;
wherefore my answer is with greater care,
that he who weeps over there may understand me,
so that guilt and grief be of one measure.
Not only by the work of the great wheels,
which direct every seed to some end
according to how the stars are its companions,
but by the largesse of divine graces,
which have for their rains such high vapors
that our sights cannot approach them,
this man was such in his new life,
virtually, that every right disposition
would have made marvelous proof in him.
But so much more malignant and more wild
does the soil become with bad seed and untilled,
the more of good earthly vigor it has.
For some time I sustained him with my face:
showing my youthful eyes to him,
with me I led him turned in the right direction.
As soon as I was on the threshold
of my second age and changed my life,
this one took himself from me, and gave himself to another.
When from flesh to spirit I had risen,
and beauty and virtue had increased in me,
I was to him less dear and less pleasing;
and he turned his steps on a way not true,
following false images of good,
which render no promise whole.
Nor did it avail me to obtain inspirations,
with which both in dream and otherwise
I called him back: so little did he care for them!
He fell so low, that all arguments
for his salvation were already short,
except to show him the lost people.
For this I visited the gate of the dead,
and to the one who has led him up here,
my prayers, weeping, were brought.
The high fate of God would be broken,
if Lethe were crossed and such a food
were tasted without some payment
of repentance that sheds tears».
