«O you who are beyond the sacred river»,
turning her speech to me with its point,
which even with its edge had seemed harsh to me,
she began again, continuing without pause,
«say, say if this is true: to so great an accusation
your confession must be joined».
My faculty was so confused,
that my voice moved, and died out before
it could be freed from its own organs.
She waited little; then said: «What are you thinking?
Answer me; for the sad memories
in you are not yet struck by the water».
Confusion and fear mixed together
pushed such a «yes» from my mouth,
that to understand it sight was required.
As a crossbow breaks, when it shoots
from too much tension, its string and bow,
and with less force the shaft hits the mark,
so I burst beneath that heavy burden,
gushing forth tears and sighs,
and my voice slackened through its passage.
Whereupon she to me: «Within my desires,
which led you to love the good
beyond which there is nothing to aspire to,
what transverse ditches or what chains
did you find, that of passing onward
you should have to strip yourself of hope?
And what comforts or what advantages
showed themselves on the brow of the others,
that you had to walk before them instead?».
After the drawing of a bitter sigh,
I barely had the voice to answer,
and my lips formed it with difficulty.
Weeping I said: «The present things
with their false pleasure turned my steps,
as soon as your face was hidden».
And she: “If you were silent or if you denied
what you confess, no less known would be
your fault: by such a judge it is known!
But when from one’s own cheek there bursts
the accusation of the sin, in our court
the wheel turns itself against the cutting edge.
Nevertheless, so that you now may bear shame
for your error, and so that another time,
hearing the Sirens, you may be stronger,
put down the seed of weeping and listen:
so you shall hear how in a contrary direction
my buried flesh should have moved you.
Never did nature or art present to you
a pleasure, so much as the beautiful limbs in which I
was enclosed, and which are scattered in the earth;
and if the highest pleasure thus failed you
through my death, what mortal thing
ought then to have drawn you to its desire?
Indeed you should have, at the first arrow
of deceitful things, risen up
behind me who was no longer such a thing.
It should not have weighed your feathers downward,
to await more blows, or a little girl
or other novelty of such brief use.
A new little bird awaits two or three;
but before the eyes of the feathered ones
a net is spread in vain or an arrow is shot.”
As children, ashamed, stand mute
with their eyes to the ground, listening
and recognizing themselves and repentant,
so I stood; and she said: “Since
you are grieving from hearing, raise your beard,
and you will take more grief from looking.”
With less resistance is a robust oak
uprooted, either by our northern wind
or by that from the land of Iarbas,
than I lifted my chin at her command;
and when by ‘the beard’ she asked for my face,
I well knew the venom of her argument.
And as my face was raised,
my eye perceived that those first creatures
had paused from their scattering;
and my lights, still little sure,
saw Beatrice turned toward the beast
that is one single person in two natures.
Under her veil and beyond the river
she seemed to me to surpass her former self more,
to surpass how she surpassed others here, when she was.
The nettle of repentance so stung me there,
that of all other things whichever had turned me
most to its love, became most my enemy.
Such recognition bit my heart,
that I fell vanquished; and what I then became,
she knows who was the cause of it.
Then, when my heart restored my outward strength,
the lady whom I had found alone
I saw above me, and she said: “Hold me, hold me!”
She had drawn me into the river up to the throat,
and pulling me behind her she went
over the water as light as a shuttle.
When I was near the blessed shore,
‘Asperges me’ so sweetly I heard,
that I cannot remember it, let alone write it.
The beautiful lady opened her arms;
she embraced my head and submerged me
where it was fitting that I should swallow the water.
Then she took me out, and bathed offered me
within the dance of the four beautiful ones;
and each one covered me with her arm.
“We are nymphs here and in heaven we are stars;
before Beatrice descended to the world,
we were ordained to her as her handmaidens.
We shall lead you to her eyes; but into the joyous
light that is within, they will sharpen yours,
the three on the other side, who gaze more deeply.”
Thus singing they began; and then
to the griffin’s breast they led me with them,
where Beatrice stood turned toward us.
They said: “See that you do not spare your gazes;
we have placed you before the emeralds
from which Love once drew his weapons at you.”
A thousand desires hotter than flame
drew my eyes to the shining eyes,
which yet on the Griffin remained steadfast.
As in a mirror the sun, not otherwise
the twofold beast within them was beaming,
now with the one, now with the other of its regiments.
Think, reader, if I did not marvel,
when I saw the thing itself remain still,
and in its image it was transformed.
While, full of wonder and of bliss,
my soul was tasting of that food
which, satisfying of itself, for itself makes one thirst,
showing themselves to be of a higher tribe
in their actions, the other three came forward,
dancing to their angelic carol.
“Turn, Beatrice, turn your holy eyes,”
was their song, “to your faithful one
who, to see you, has moved so many steps!
By grace, grant us the grace that you unveil
to him your mouth, so that he may discern
the second beauty that you conceal.”
O splendor of living eternal light,
who has grown so pale beneath the shade
of Parnassus, or drunk from its cistern,
that he would not seem to have his mind encumbered,
attempting to render you as you appeared
there where the harmonizing heaven adumbrates you,
when in the open air you unveiled yourself?
