So fixed and attentive were my eyes
to slake their ten-year thirst,
that all my other senses were extinct.
And they on this side and on that had a wall
of indifference—so her holy smile
drew them to itself with the old net!—;
when by force my face was turned
toward my left by those goddesses,
because I heard from them a 'Too fixedly!';
and the condition that one sees
in eyes just now struck by the sun,
caused me to be for a while without sight.
But when my vision was reformed to the lesser light
(and I say 'lesser' in respect to the great
radiance from which I had by force removed myself),
I saw turned upon its right flank
the glorious army, and returning
with the sun and the seven flames at its face.
As a troop under its shields, to save itself,
wheels, and turns itself with the standard,
before it can completely change its formation;
that soldiery of the celestial kingdom
which was in the vanguard, all passed by us
before the chariot bent its first pole.
Then to the wheels the ladies returned,
and the griffin moved the blessed cargo
so that not a single feather of it shook.
The lovely lady who drew me through the ford
and Statius and I followed the wheel
that made its orbit with the smaller arc.
Thus, walking through the high, empty wood,
the fault of her who believed the serpent,
an angelic melody tempered our steps.
Perhaps in three flights an unbridled arrow
took as much space as we had
moved, when Beatrice descended.
I heard them all murmur “Adam”;
then they circled a plant stripped
of leaves and of other foliage on every branch.
Its crown, which so greatly spreads out
the higher up it is, would be by the Indians
in their forests admired for its height.
“Blessed are you, Griffin, who do not break off
with your beak from this wood sweet to the taste,
since the belly is badly twisted by it.”
Thus around the robust tree
cried the others; and the two-natured animal:
“Thus is preserved the seed of all justice.”
And turned to the pole that he had drawn,
he dragged it to the foot of the widowed branch,
and that which came from it he left bound to it.
As our plants, when there falls
down the great light mixed with that
which radiates behind the celestial fish,
become turgid, and then each one renews itself
with its own color, before the sun
harnesses his coursers beneath another star;
less than of rose and more than of violet
opening a color, the plant was renewed,
which before had its boughs so bare.
I did not understand it, nor is it sung here,
the hymn that those people then sang,
nor did I endure the whole melody.
If I could portray how they were lulled to sleep,
the pitiless eyes hearing of Syrinx,
the eyes for whom staying awake cost so dear;
like a painter who paints from a model,
I would draw how I fell asleep;
but let him be who he may who can depict sleeping well.
Therefore I pass on to when I awoke,
and I say that a splendor tore the veil
of my sleep, and a call: “Arise: what are you doing?”.
As those who, at seeing the little flowers of the apple tree
that makes the angels greedy for its fruit
and makes perpetual wedding feasts in heaven,
Peter and John and James, led
and overcome, returned to the word
by which greater sleeps were broken,
and saw their company diminished
as much of Moses as of Elijah,
and their master's garment changed;
so I returned, and I saw that pious lady
standing over me, she who was the guide
of my steps along the river before.
And all in doubt I said: “Where is Beatrice?”.
At which she: “See her beneath the foliage
new, sitting upon its root.
See the company that surrounds her:
the others behind the griffin go on high
with a song more sweet and more profound.”
And if her speech was more diffuse,
I do not know, for already in my eyes was
she who had closed me to any other understanding.
Alone she was sitting on the true earth,
like a guard left there of the chariot
that I saw the two-formed beast tie.
In a circle they made of themselves a cloister for her,
the seven nymphs, with those lights in hand
that are safe from the North Wind and the South Wind.
“Here you will be for a short time a forest-dweller;
and you will be with me without end a citizen
of that Rome where Christ is a Roman.
Therefore, for the good of the world that lives ill,
keep your eyes now on the chariot, and what you see,
when you have returned yonder, make sure that you write.”
Thus Beatrice; and I, who wholly at the feet
of her commands was devout,
turned my mind and my eyes where she willed.
Never descended with so swift a motion
fire from a thick cloud, when it rains
from that region which is most remote,
as I saw descend the bird of Jove
down through the tree, breaking off the bark,
not to mention the flowers and the new leaves;
and it struck the chariot with all its force;
at which it reeled like a ship in a storm,
overcome by the waves, now to starboard, now to port.
Then I saw leap into the cradle
of the triumphal vehicle a fox
that seemed starved of all good food;
but, rebuking it for its ugly sins,
my lady turned it to such flight
as its fleshless bones allowed.
Then, by the way it had first come,
I saw the eagle descend into the ark
of the chariot and leave it feathered with its plumes;
and such as issues from a heart that grieves,
such a voice came from heaven and said thus:
“O my little ship, how ill you are laden!”.
Then it seemed to me that the earth opened
between the two wheels, and I saw a dragon come out of it
that up through the chariot fixed its tail;
and like a wasp that retracts its sting,
drawing its wicked tail to itself,
it tore out part of the floor, and went its wandering way.
That which remained, as from couch-grass
living earth, from the plumage, offered
perhaps with a sound and benign intention,
recovered itself, and was recovered
both the one and the other wheel and the pole, in so short a time
that a sigh holds the mouth open longer.
Transformed thus, the holy edifice
put forth heads from its parts,
three upon the pole and one on each corner.
The first were horned like an ox,
but the four had a single horn on their foreheads:
a similar monster had never yet been seen.
Secure, like a fortress on a high mountain,
sitting upon it a shameless whore
appeared to me, with eyes quick to wander;
and as if so that she not be taken from him,
I saw standing at her side a giant;
and they kissed each other at times.
But because her greedy and wandering eye
she turned on me, that ferocious lover
flogged her from head to foot;
then, full of suspicion and cruel with wrath,
he unbound the monster, and dragged it through the wood,
so far that of it he made a shield for me
to the whore and to the new beast.
