‘Deus, venerunt gentes,’ alternating
now three, now four, in sweet psalmody,
the ladies began, and weeping;
and Beatrice, sighing and pious,
listened to them so changed, that little
more at the cross was Mary altered.
But after the other virgins gave space
for her to speak, risen straight to her feet,
she answered, colored like fire:
‘A little while, and you will not see me;
and again, my beloved sisters,
a little while, and you will see me.’
Then she placed all seven before her,
and after herself, with only a gesture, moved
me and the lady and the sage who had remained.
Thus she went on; and I do not believe it was
her tenth step placed upon the ground,
when with her eyes she struck my eyes;
and with a tranquil look, “Come more quickly,”
she said to me, “so that, if I speak with you,
you may be well disposed to listen to me.”
As soon as I was, as I ought to be, with her,
she said to me: “Brother, why do you not venture
to question me now as you come with me?”
As it happens to those who are too reverent
when speaking before their superior,
that they do not draw the living voice to their teeth,
it happened to me, that without a whole sound
I began: “My lady, my need
you know, and that which is good for it.”
And she to me: «From fear and from shame
I want you from now on to disentangle yourself,
so that you no longer speak like a man who dreams.
Know that the vessel that the serpent broke,
was and is not; but let him who is to blame believe
that God’s vengeance fears no sops.
Not for all time will the eagle be without an heir
that left its feathers on the chariot,
whereby it became a monster and then a prey;
for I see certainly, and therefore I narrate it,
stars already near to give us a time,
secure from every obstacle and every barrier,
in which a five hundred, ten, and five,
sent by God, will slay the harlot
with that giant who sins with her.
And perhaps my dark narration,
like Themis and Sphinx, persuades you less,
because in their manner it dulls the intellect;
but the facts will soon be the Naiads,
that will solve this hard enigma
without harm to flocks or to harvests.
You take note; and just as they are borne by me,
so you are to record these words for the living
in that life which is a running toward death.
And have in mind, when you write them,
not to conceal what you have seen of the plant
which now has twice been despoiled here.
Whoever robs that one or tears that one,
with a blasphemy of deed offends God,
who for His own use alone created it holy.
For biting that one, in pain and in desire
five thousand years and more the first soul
yearned for him who punished the bite on himself.
Your intellect sleeps, if it does not esteem
that for a unique reason it is so lofty
and so inverted at its summit.
And if your vain thoughts around your mind
had not been water of Elsa,
and your pleasure in them a Pyramus to the mulberry,
through so many circumstances alone
the justice of God, in the interdict,
you would have recognized in the tree morally.
But because I see you in your intellect
made of stone and, petrified, stained,
so that the light of my speech dazzles you,
I want you also, if not written, at least painted,
to carry it away inside you for the reason
that one brings back the staff girt with palm».
And I: «Just as wax is by a seal,
which does not change the figure impressed,
my brain is now marked by you.
But why does your desired word fly
so far above my sight,
that the more it helps itself the more it loses it?».
«So that you may know,» she said, «that school
you have followed, and see how its doctrine
can follow my word;
and see your way from the divine
to be as distant as is divided
from earth the heaven that whirls highest».
Wherefore I answered her: «I do not remember
that I ever estranged myself from you,
nor do I have a conscience of it that gnaws at me».
«And if you cannot remember it,»
smiling she replied, «now recall
how you drank of Lethe today;
and if from smoke fire is argued,
this oblivion clearly concludes
a fault in your will, intent elsewhere.
Truly my words will now be naked,
as far as it shall be fitting
to uncover them to your rude sight».
And more brilliant and with slower steps
the sun held the circle of midday,
which here and there, as you view it, is formed,
when they stopped, just as he stops
who goes before people as a scout
if he finds something new or its traces,
the seven ladies at the edge of a pale shadow,
such as beneath green leaves and black branches
the high mountain casts over its cold streams.
Before them Euphrates and Tigris
I seemed to see issue from one fountain,
and, like friends, slowly part from one another.
"O light, o glory of the human race,
what water is this that here unfolds
from one source and from itself moves away?"
For such a prayer it was said to me: "Pray
Matelda to tell you." And here replied,
as one does who frees herself from blame,
the lovely lady: "This and other things
were told to him by me; and I am sure
that the water of Lethe did not hide it from him."
And Beatrice: "Perhaps a greater care,
which often deprives the memory,
has made his mind dark within his eyes.
But see Eunoë that flows there:
lead him to it, and as you are accustomed,
revive his deadened power."
Like a gentle soul, that makes no excuse,
but makes its will the will of another
as soon as by a sign it is disclosed;
so, after I was taken by her,
the lovely lady set off, and to Statius
said in a lady-like way: "Come with him."
If I had, reader, more space
to write, I would yet sing in part
of the sweet drink that would never have sated me;
but because all the pages are full
allotted to this second canticle,
the bridle of my art lets me go no further.
I returned from the most holy wave
remade just as new plants
renewed with new foliage,
pure and ready to ascend to the stars.
