The glory of him who moves all things
penetrates the universe, and resplends
more in one part and less elsewhere.
In the heaven that most receives of his light
I was, and saw things which to retell
he who descends from there knows not nor can;
because, in approaching its desire,
our intellect sinks so deep,
that memory cannot follow where it goes.
Nevertheless, as much of the holy kingdom
as I could treasure in my mind,
will now be the matter of my song.
O good Apollo, for this final labor
make me such a vessel of your power,
as you require for granting the beloved laurel.
Until now one peak of Parnassus
was enough for me; but now with both
I must enter the arena that remains.
Enter into my breast, and so breathe
as when you drew Marsyas
from the sheath of his own limbs.
O divine power, if you so lend yourself to me
that I may show forth the shadow of the blessed kingdom
stamped upon my mind,
you shall see me come to the foot of your beloved tree
and crown me with those leaves
of which the matter and you shall make me worthy.
So rarely, father, are they gathered
for the triumph of a caesar or a poet,
(the fault and shame of human wants),
that the Peneian foliage ought to give birth
to joy in the glad Delphic deity,
when anyone thirsts for it.
A great flame follows a little spark:
perhaps after me, with better voices,
prayers will be offered for Cirrha to respond.
The world’s lamp rises for mortals by diverse outlets,
but from that one
which joins four circles with three crosses,
with a better course and with a better star
it comes forth conjoined, and the worldly wax
it tempers and seals more in its own way.
That outlet had made it morning there and evening here,
and that hemisphere was almost all white,
and the other part black,
when I saw Beatrice on my left flank
turned and gazing into the sun:
no eagle ever so fixed itself upon it.
And as a second ray is wont
to issue from the first and re-ascend upward,
just like a pilgrim who wishes to return,
so from her act, through my eyes infused
into my imagination, my own was made,
and I fixed my eyes on the sun beyond our use.
Much is licit there, that is not licit here
for our faculties, thanks to the place
made as the proper home for the human species.
I did not endure it long, nor so little,
that I did not see it sparkle all around,
like iron that comes boiling from the fire;
and suddenly it seemed that day to day
had been added, as if He who has the power
had adorned the sky with another sun.
Beatrice, all upon the eternal wheels,
stood with her eyes fixed; and I on her
fixed my lights, removed from there above.
In her aspect I became within such,
as Glaucus became on tasting the herb
that made him a consort in the sea of the other gods.
To transhumanize cannot be signified in words;
therefore let the example suffice
for him for whom grace reserves the experience.
Whether I was only that of me which You created
last, O Love that governs the heaven,
You know it, who with Your light did lift me.
When the wheel that you make eternal,
O desired one, made me attentive to itself
with the harmony that you temper and distinguish,
so much of the sky then seemed to me lit
by the sun’s flame, that no rain or river
ever made a lake so vast.
The newness of the sound and the great light
lit in me a desire for their cause
never felt with such keenness.
Wherefore she, who saw me as I see myself,
to quiet my troubled soul,
opened her mouth before I could ask,
and began: “You make yourself dense
with false imagining, so that you do not see
what you would see if you had shaken it off.
You are not on earth, as you believe;
but lightning, fleeing its proper place,
never ran as you who are returning to it.”
If I was stripped of my first doubt
by the short, smiling words,
I was more entangled in a new one,
and I said: “I was just content and resting
from my great wonder; but now I wonder
how I can rise through these light bodies.”
Wherefore she, after a pitying sigh,
turned her eyes toward me with that look
that a mother gives a delirious son,
and began: “All things whatsoever
have an order among themselves, and this is form
that makes the universe resemble God.
Here the high creatures see the imprint
of the eternal worth, which is the end
for which the aforesaid rule is made.
In the order that I speak of, all natures
are inclined, by diverse lots,
more and less near to their origin;
wherefore they move to different ports
across the great sea of being, and each
with an instinct given to it that carries it.
This carries the fire up toward the moon;
this is the mover in mortal hearts;
this binds and unites the earth in itself;
nor does this bow shoot only the creatures
that are outside of intelligence,
but also those that have intellect and love.
The providence that disposes so much
makes the heaven with its light always quiet
in which that which has greatest haste revolves;
and now there, as to a decreed site,
the power of that bowstring carries us,
which directs what it shoots to a happy target.
It is true that, as form does not accord
many a time with the intention of the art,
because the matter is deaf to respond,
so from this course the creature sometimes
departs, which has the power
to swerve, thus impelled, to another part;
and just as fire can be seen to fall
from a cloud, so the first impulse,
twisted by false pleasure, is bent to earth.
You should no more wonder, if I judge rightly,
at your ascent, than at a stream
if from a high mountain it descends to the depths.
It would be a marvel in you if, deprived
of impediment, you had settled down below,
like quietness on earth in a living fire.”
Thence she turned her face toward the heaven.
