O you who are in a little boat,
eager to listen, having followed
behind my ship that, singing, crosses,
turn back to see your shores again:
do not set out on the deep sea, for perhaps,
losing me, you would be left bewildered.
The water that I take was never sailed before;
Minerva breathes, and Apollo leads me,
and the nine Muses point out the Bears to me.
You other few who early craned your necks
for the bread of the angels, on which
one lives here but is never sated,
you may indeed put upon the high salt
your own vessel, keeping to my furrow
before the water turns smooth again.
Those glorious ones who passed to Colchis
were not as struck with wonder as you shall be,
when they saw Jason become a plowman.
The innate and perpetual thirst
for the God-formed kingdom carried us
swiftly, almost as you see the heavens move.
Beatrice was looking up, and I at her;
and perhaps in the time an arrow rests,
flies, and is unloosed from the bow-nut,
I saw myself arrived where a marvelous thing
drew my face to itself; and she from whom
my own concern could not be hidden,
turned to me, as joyful as she was fair,
"Direct your mind in gratitude to God," she said,
"who has joined us with the first star."
It seemed to me that a cloud covered us,
luminous, dense, solid, and polished,
almost like a diamond that the sun had struck.
Within itself the eternal pearl
received us, as water receives
a ray of light, remaining whole.
If I was body, and here we cannot conceive
how one dimension suffered another,
which must be if body enters body,
it ought to kindle in us more the desire
to see that Essence in which is seen
how our nature and God were united.
There we shall see what we now hold by faith,
not demonstrated, but known in itself,
like the first truth that a man believes.
I answered: "My lady, as devoutly
as I can possibly be, I thank Him
who has removed me from the mortal world.
But tell me: what are the dark marks
of this body, which down there on earth
make others tell the fable of Cain?"
She smiled a little, and then: "If the opinion,"
she said, "of mortals errs
where the key of sense does not unlock,
surely the arrows of wonder should not now
prick you, since even following the senses
you see that reason has short wings.
But tell me what you yourself think of it."
And I: "What appears to us diverse up here
I believe is caused by bodies rare and dense."
And she: “Certainly you will see submerged
in falsehood your belief, if you listen well
to the argument that I will make against it.
The eighth sphere shows you many
lights, which in their kind and in their quantity
can be noted to have different aspects.
If rare and dense alone caused this,
one single virtue would be in them all,
more and less and equally distributed.
Different virtues must be the fruits
of formal principles, and those, save one,
would by your reasoning be destroyed.
Again, if rarity were the cause of that dark
mark you ask about, either this planet
would be in part so wanting of its matter
all the way through, or, as a body shares
the fat and lean, so this one would
alternate the pages in its volume.
If the first were true, it would be manifest
in the sun’s eclipses, by the light
shining through, as when put in other rarity.
This is not so: therefore one must look to
the other; and if it happens that I annul the other,
your opinion will be proven false.
If it is that this rarity does not pass through,
there must be a limit from which
its contrary allows it to pass no further;
and from there the other’s ray is reflected
just as color returns from glass
which has lead concealed behind it.
Now you will say that the ray shows itself
more dim there than in other parts,
because it is reflected from more far back.
From this objection you can be freed
by an experiment, if you ever try it,
which is wont to be the fount of your arts’ streams.
You shall take three mirrors; and two of them remove
from you an equal distance, and the third, more removed,
let your eyes find between the first two.
Turned toward them, have a light stand behind
your back that lights the three mirrors
and returns to you reflected from them all.
Although in quantity it does not extend as much,
the more distant image, there you will see
that it must shine with equal brightness.
Now, as beneath the strokes of the hot rays
the substance of the snow remains stripped bare
both of its color and its former cold,
so you, remaining in your intellect,
I wish to inform with a light so vivid
that it will tremble as you look on it.
Within the heaven of the divine peace
revolves a body in whose virtue
the being of all its content lies.
The heaven that follows, which has so many sights,
that being divides among diverse essences,
distinct from it and contained by it.
The other spheres through various differences
the distinctions which they have within themselves
dispose to their ends and their seeds.
These organs of the world so go,
as you now see, from grade to grade,
that from above they take and below they make.
Regard well now how I proceed
through this place to the truth that you desire,
so that then you may know how to hold the ford alone.
The motion and the virtue of the holy spheres,
like from the smith the art of the hammer,
from the blessed movers must needs be breathed;
and the heaven which so many lights make beautiful,
from the profound mind that turns it
takes the image and makes of it a seal.
And as the soul within your dust
through different members and conformed
to diverse powers resolves itself,
so the intelligence its goodness
multiplied through the stars unfolds,
turning itself upon its own unity.
Diverse virtue makes a diverse alloy
with the precious body that it enlivens,
in which, just as life in you, it is bound.
Through the joyful nature from which it derives,
the mingled virtue shines through the body
as gladness through a living pupil.
From this comes that which from light to light
appears different, not from dense and rare;
it is the formal principle which produces,
according to its goodness, the dark and the bright».
