That sun which first with love had warmed my breast,
had of beautiful truth to me uncovered,
by proving and refuting, the sweet aspect;
and I, to confess myself corrected and certain,
as much as was befitting,
raised my head to speak more erectly;
but a vision appeared that held
me to itself so tightly, to be seen,
that of my confession I had no memory.
As through transparent and polished glass,
or through clear and tranquil waters,
not so deep that the bottom is lost,
the outlines of our faces return
so faint, that a pearl upon a white forehead
comes to our pupils with no lesser force;
such faces I saw, ready to speak;
for which I ran into the contrary error
to that which kindled love between the man and the spring.
As soon as I was aware of them,
judging them to be reflected images,
to see whose they were, I turned my eyes back;
and I saw nothing, and turned them forward again
straight into the light of the sweet guide,
who, smiling, was burning in her holy eyes.
“Do not be amazed that I smile,”
she said to me, “at your childish thought,
since on the truth your foot does not yet trust,
but turns you, as it is wont, to emptiness:
what you see are true substances,
relegated here for failure in a vow.
Therefore speak with them, and hear, and believe;
for the true light that contents them
does not let them turn their feet from it.”
And I to the shade that seemed most eager
to speak, turned myself, and began,
almost like a man whom too much desire bewilders:
"O well-created spirit, who in the rays
of eternal life feel the sweetness
that, not tasted, is never understood,
it will be a grace to me if you content me
with your name and with your fate."
At which she, ready and with smiling eyes:
"Our charity does not shut its doors
to a just wish, any more than that Charity
which wills all its court to be like itself.
In the world I was a virgin sister;
and if your mind regards itself well,
my being more beautiful will not hide me from you,
but you will recognize that I am Piccarda,
who, placed here with these other blessed ones,
am blessed in the slowest sphere.
Our affections, which are aflame only
in the pleasure of the Holy Spirit,
rejoice in being formed by His order.
And this fate which appears so far down,
is therefore given to us, because our vows
were neglected, and void in some part."
At which I to her: "In your wondrous aspects
there shines I know not what of the divine
that transmutes you from my first conceptions:
therefore I was not quick to remember;
but now what you tell me helps me,
so that to picture you is easier for me.
But tell me: you who are happy here,
do you desire a more exalted place
to see more and to make yourselves more friends?"
With those other shades she first smiled a little;
then she answered me so joyfully,
that she seemed to burn in love's first fire:
"Brother, our will is quieted
by the power of charity, which makes us want
only what we have, and thirst for nothing else.
If we desired to be more exalted,
our desires would be discordant
with the will of Him who assigns us here;
which you will see has no place in these spheres,
if to be in charity is necessary here,
and if you consider its nature well.
Rather, it is essential to this blessed existence
to hold ourselves within the divine will,
so that our own wills become one;
so that, as we are from threshold to threshold
throughout this kingdom, it pleases the whole kingdom
as it does the King who wills us into His will.
And in His will is our peace:
it is that sea to which all things move
which it creates or which nature makes."
It was clear to me then how every where
in heaven is paradise, even if the grace
of the highest good does not rain there in one measure.
But just as it happens, if one food satisfies
and for another the craving still remains,
that the latter is asked for and for the former thanks is given,
so did I with gesture and with word,
to learn from her what was the web
from which she did not draw the shuttle to the end.
"A perfect life and high merit en-heavens
a lady higher up," she said to me, "by whose rule
in your world below one is clothed and veiled,
so that until death one may wake and sleep
with that spouse who accepts every vow
that charity conforms to his pleasure.
From the world, to follow her, as a young girl
I fled, and in her habit I enclosed myself
and promised the way of her order.
Then men, to evil more than to good accustomed,
tore me away from the sweet cloister:
God knows what my life then became.
And this other splendor that reveals itself to you
on my right side and that is kindled
with all the light of our sphere,
understands of herself what I say of myself;
she was a sister, and so from her head was taken
the shadow of the sacred bands.
But after she was turned back to the world
against her will and against good custom,
she was never unbound from the veil of her heart.
This is the light of the great Constance
who from the second wind of Swabia
generated the third and the final power."
Thus she spoke to me, and then began ‘Ave,
Maria’ singing, and singing she vanished
like a heavy thing through deep water.
My sight, which followed her as far
as was possible, after it lost her,
turned to the object of my greater desire,
and to Beatrice wholly it was converted;
but she so flashed upon my gaze
that at first my vision did not endure it;
and this made me slower to ask.
