Between two foods, distant and moving
in the same way, a man would sooner die of hunger,
than a free man would bring one to his teeth;
so would a lamb stand between two cravings
of fierce wolves, equally fearing;
so would a dog stand between two does:
for which, if I was silent, I do not blame myself,
impelled in equal measure by my doubts,
since it was necessary, nor do I praise myself.
I was silent, but my desire was painted
on my face, and my questioning with it,
far more ardently than by distinct speech.
Beatrice did as Daniel did,
lifting Nebuchadnezzar from the wrath
that had made him unjustly cruel;
and she said: «I see well how one
and the other desire so pulls you, that your concern
so binds itself that it does not breathe forth.
You reason: “If the good will endures,
for what reason does the violence of another
lessen for me the measure of merit?”.
Also giving you cause to doubt
is the seeming return of souls to the stars,
according to the doctrine of Plato.
These are the questions that in your will
sting equally; and therefore I will first
treat the one that has more gall.
Of the Seraphim, the one who most in-Gods himself,
Moses, Samuel, and whichever John
you choose, I say, and even Mary,
do not have their thrones in another heaven
than these spirits who just appeared to you,
nor have more or fewer years to their being;
but all make beautiful the first circle,
and have sweet life in different degrees
by feeling more and less the eternal breath.
They showed themselves here, not because this sphere
is allotted to them, but to be a sign
of the celestial that has less ascent.
It is necessary to speak thus to your intellect,
because only from what is sensed does it learn
that which it then makes worthy of the intellect.
For this reason Scripture condescends
to your faculty, and attributes feet and hands
to God, but means something else;
and Holy Church with a human aspect
represents Gabriel and Michael to you,
and the other who made Tobias healthy again.
What Timaeus argues about the souls
is not similar to what is seen here,
because it seems that he means it as he says it.
He says that the soul returns to its star,
believing it to have been cut from there
when nature gave it as a form;
and perhaps his meaning is of another kind
than the words sound, and it may have
an intention that should not be derided.
If he means that the honor of the influence
and the blame return to these wheels, perhaps
his bow strikes some truth.
This principle, misunderstood, once twisted
almost the whole world, so that it ran
to name Jupiter, Mercury, and Mars.
The other doubt that stirs you
has less venom, for its malice
could not lead you from me elsewhere.
For our justice to seem unjust
in the eyes of mortals, is an argument
of faith and not of heretical wickedness.
But because your understanding can
well penetrate to this truth,
as you desire, I will make you content.
If violence is when he who suffers
contributes nothing to him who forces,
these souls were not excused by it:
for will, if it wills not, is not quenched,
but acts as nature does in fire,
if violence a thousand times should twist it.
Therefore, if it bends much or little,
it follows the force; and so these did,
having the power to flee back to the holy place.
If their will had been entire,
like that which Lawrence held upon the grid,
and made Mucius severe to his own hand,
so it would have driven them back on the road
from which they were dragged, as soon as they were free;
but so firm a will is all too rare.
And by these words, if you have gathered them
as you ought, the argument is annulled
that would have troubled you still many times.
But now another pass crosses itself
before your eyes, such that by yourself
you would not exit: you would first be weary.
I have put it for certain in your mind
that a blessed soul could not lie,
because it is always near the first truth;
and then you could hear from Piccarda
that Constance kept her affection for the veil;
so that she seems here to contradict me.
Many times already, brother, it has happened
that, to flee peril, against one's will
one did what it was not right to do;
like Alcmaeon, who, for this beseeched
by his own father, slew his own mother,
so as not to lose piety he became impious.
At this point I want you to think
that the force mixes with the will, and they make it
so that the offenses cannot be excused.
Absolute will does not consent to the harm;
but it consents to it insofar as it fears,
if it draws back, to fall into greater trouble.
Therefore, when Piccarda expresses that,
she means the absolute will, and I
the other; so that we both speak truth together.”
Such was the flowing of the holy stream
that came from the fount whence every truth derives;
thus it set at peace one and the other desire.
"O beloved of the first lover, O divine one,"
I said then, "whose speech so floods me
and warms me, that more and more it gives me life,
my affection is not so profound
that it suffices to render you grace for grace;
but may He who sees and can, for this respond.
I see well that our intellect is never sated
unless the truth illuminates it
outside of which no other truth extends.
It rests in that, like a wild beast in its lair,
as soon as it has reached it; and it can reach it:
if not, every desire would be in vain.
From this is born, in the manner of a new shoot,
a doubt at the foot of the truth; and it is nature
that pushes us to the summit from hill to hill.
This invites me, this makes me secure
with reverence, lady, in asking you
about another truth that is obscure to me.
I wish to know if a man can satisfy you
for broken vows with other good works,
such that in your scales they may not seem slight."
Beatrice looked at me with eyes full
of such divine sparks of love,
that, vanquished, my power turned its back,
and I almost lost myself with my eyes cast down.
