“If I flame upon you in the heat of love
beyond the mode that is seen on earth,
so that I overcome the power of your sight,
do not be amazed, for this proceeds
from perfect vision, which, as it apprehends,
so in the good apprehended it moves its foot.
I see well how already there shines
in your intellect the eternal light,
which, once seen, alone and always kindles love;
and if some other thing seduces your love,
it is nothing but some trace of that light,
poorly recognized, which shines through there.
You wish to know if with another service,
for a failed vow, one can render so much
that the soul is secure from dispute.”
Thus Beatrice began this canto;
and like a man who does not break his speech,
she continued thus the holy process:
“The greatest gift that God in His largesse
made in creating, and to His own goodness
most conformed, and the one which He most prizes,
was the freedom of the will;
with which the intelligent creatures,
and all and they alone, were and are endowed.
Now it will appear to you, if you reason from this,
the high value of a vow, if it is so made
that God consents when you consent;
for, in confirming the pact between God and man,
a victim is made of this treasure,
such as I say; and it is made by one’s own act.
What, then, can be rendered for restoration?
If you think to use well that which you have offered,
you wish to make good work from ill-gotten gains.
You are now certain of the major point;
but because Holy Church gives dispensation in this,
which seems to counter the truth I have uncovered to you,
you must yet sit a little longer at table,
because the rigid food you have taken
still requires help for your digestion.
Open your mind to what I reveal to you
and fix it there within; for it does not make knowledge,
without retaining it, to have understood.
Two things are integral to the essence
of this sacrifice: the one is that
of which it is made; the other is the pact.
This latter can never be cancelled
except by being kept; and concerning it
what has been spoken above is so precise:
therefore it was necessary for the Hebrews
still to make offerings, even though some offerings
were commuted, as you must know.
The other part, which is disclosed to you as the matter,
can well be such that one does not err
if it is converted into other matter.
But let no one shift a cargo to his shoulder
by his own whim, without the turning
both of the white key and of the yellow;
and believe every exchange to be foolish
if the thing given up is not contained in the thing taken on
as the four is in the six.
Therefore, whatever thing weighs so much
by its own value that it tips every scale,
cannot be satisfied with any other expense.
Let not mortals take a vow in jest;
be faithful, and in doing this, not askew,
like Jephthah with his first offering;
for whom it was more fitting to say ‘I did evil,’
than, by keeping it, to do worse; and as foolish
you can find the great leader of the Greeks,
for which Iphigenia wept for her lovely face,
and made both the foolish and the wise weep for her
who heard tell of such a rite.
Be, Christians, more grave in your movements:
be not like a feather to every wind,
and do not believe that every water washes you.
You have the new and the old Testament,
and the pastor of the Church who guides you;
let this suffice for your salvation.
If evil greed cries out something else to you,
be men, and not mad sheep,
so that the Jew among you does not laugh at you!
Do not act like a lamb that leaves the milk
of its mother, and simple and wanton
fights with itself for its own pleasure!”
Thus Beatrice to me, as I write;
then she turned, all full of longing,
to that part where the world is most alive.
Her silence and her changed appearance
put silence to my eager intellect,
which already had new questions before it;
and just as an arrow that in the target
strikes before the string is quiet,
so we rushed into the second realm.
There my lady I saw so joyful,
as she placed herself in the light of that heaven,
that the planet made itself more lucent from it.
And if the star changed and smiled,
what did I become, who by my very nature
am mutable in every way!
As in a fishpond that is tranquil and pure
the fish are drawn to that which comes from outside
in a way that they deem it their pasture,
so I saw well more than a thousand splendors
draw themselves toward us, and in each was heard:
"Behold one who will increase our loves."
And as each one came to us,
the shade was seen, full of gladness,
in the bright effulgence that came forth from it.
Think, reader, if what here begins
were not to proceed, how you would have
an anguished scarcity of more knowing;
and by yourself you will see how from these
I was in desire to hear their conditions,
as soon as they were manifest to my eyes.
"O well-born one to whom to see the thrones
of the eternal triumph grace concedes
before the warfare is abandoned,
of the light that spreads through all of heaven
we are kindled; and therefore, if you desire
to be enlightened by us, satisfy yourself at your pleasure."
Thus by one of those pious spirits
was it said to me; and by Beatrice: "Speak, speak
securely, and believe them as you would gods."
“I see well how you nest yourself
in your own light, and that you draw it from your eyes,
because it flashes just as you smile;
but I do not know who you are, nor why you have,
worthy soul, the rank of the sphere
that veils itself to mortals with another’s rays.”
This I said directly to the light
that had first spoken to me; wherefore it made itself
far more brilliant than it was before.
Just as the sun which hides itself
by too much light, when the heat has gnawed away
the tempering mists of the thick vapors,
so for more joy did the holy figure hide itself from me
within its own ray;
and thus enclosed, enclosed, it answered me
in the way that the following canto sings.
