«After Constantine had turned the eagle
against the course of heaven, which it had followed
behind the ancient one who took Lavinia,
a hundred and a hundred years and more the bird of God
remained on the far edge of Europe,
near the mountains from which it first came forth;
and under the shadow of the sacred wings
it governed the world there from hand to hand,
and, so changing, it came down to mine.
Caesar I was and am Justinian,
who, by the will of the first love that I feel,
from within the laws drew out the excessive and the vain.
And before I was intent upon this work,
one nature to be in Christ, and no more,
I believed, and with such faith I was content;
but the blessed Agapetus, who was
supreme pastor, to the sincere faith
directed me with his words.
I believed him; and what was in his faith,
I now see so clearly, as you see
every contradiction is both false and true.
As soon as with the Church I moved my feet,
by grace it pleased God to inspire in me
the high labor, and I gave myself all to it;
and to my Belisarius I commended the armies,
to whom heaven’s right hand was so conjoined,
that it was a sign that I should be at rest.
Now here my answer to the first question comes to a point;
but its nature compels me to add a supplement,
so that you may see with how much reason
he moves against the most holy sign,
both he who appropriates it and he who opposes it.
See what great virtue has made it worthy
of reverence; and it began from the hour
that Pallas died to give it a kingdom.
You know it made its dwelling in Alba
for three hundred years and more, until the end
when the three fought the three for it again.
And you know what it did from the wrong of the Sabines
to the grief of Lucretia under seven kings,
conquering the neighboring peoples all around.
You know what it did, borne by the great
Romans against Brennus, against Pyrrhus,
against the other princes and leagues;
whence Torquatus and Quinctius, who from his neglected lock
was named, the Decii and the Fabii
had the fame that I gladly admire.
It struck down the pride of the Arabs
who behind Hannibal crossed
the alpine rocks, Po, from which you flow.
Under it, as young men, triumphed
Scipio and Pompey; and to that hill
under which you were born it seemed bitter.
Then, near the time when all of heaven willed
to bring the world to its own serene way,
Caesar by the will of Rome took it.
And what it did from the Var to the Rhine,
Isère saw and Hérault and Seine saw
and every valley whence the Rhône is full.
What it did after it left Ravenna
and leaped the Rubicon, was of such a flight,
that neither tongue nor pen could follow it.
Toward Spain it turned its host,
then toward Dyrrachium, and struck Pharsalus
so hard that the pain was felt at the hot Nile.
Antandros and Simois, whence it set out,
it saw again, and there where Hector lies;
and then for Ptolemy's sake it roused itself for ill.
From there it descended like lightning on Juba;
whence it turned into your west,
where it heard the Pompeian trumpet.
Of what it did with the next standard-bearer,
Brutus and Cassius howl in Hell,
and Modena and Perugia were mournful.
For this the sad Cleopatra still weeps,
who, fleeing before it, from the serpent
took a sudden and dark death.
With him it ran as far as the Red shore;
with him it put the world in such peace
that the temple of Janus was closed.
But that which the sign that makes me speak
had done before and then was to do
for the mortal kingdom that is subject to it,
becomes in appearance small and obscure,
if it is seen in the hand of the third Caesar
with a clear eye and with pure feeling;
for the living justice that inspires me
granted to it, in the hand of the one I speak of,
the glory of taking vengeance for its wrath.
Now marvel here at what I unfold to you:
afterward it ran with Titus to take vengeance
for the vengeance of the ancient sin.
And when the Lombard tooth bit
the Holy Church, under its wings
Charlemagne, conquering, came to her aid.
Now you can judge of those certain men
whom I accused above and of their failings,
which are the cause of all your evils.
The one opposes the yellow lilies to the public sign,
and the other appropriates it for his party,
so that it is hard to see who errs the more.
Let the Ghibellines, let them practice their art
under another sign, for he follows it ill
whoever separates justice and it;
and let not this new Charles strike it down
with his Guelphs, but let him fear the claws
that tore the hide from a mightier lion.
Many times already have sons wept
for the fault of the father, and let it not be thought
that God will change His arms for their lilies!
This little star is adorned with
the good spirits who have been active
so that honor and fame might follow them:
and when desires aim in this direction,
so deviating, it must be that the rays
of true love rise upward less alive.
But in the balancing of our rewards
with merit is part of our happiness,
because we see them neither less nor more.
Wherefore the living justice sweetens
in us our affection so, that it can never
be turned aside to any wickedness.
Different voices make sweet notes;
so different ranks in our life
render sweet harmony among these wheels.
And within the present pearl
shines the light of Romeo, whose
great and beautiful work was ill-rewarded.
But the Provençals who worked against him
have not laughed; and thus he walks an evil path
who makes for himself harm from another’s good deed.
Four daughters he had, and each a queen,
Raymond Berenger, and this for him was done by
Romeo, a humble and pilgrim person.
And then sly words moved him
to demand an accounting from this just man,
who rendered him seven and five for ten;
thence he departed, poor and old.
And if the world knew the heart he had
begging his living crust by crust,
much as it praises him, it would praise him more.
