«Hosanna, sanctus Deus sabaoth,
super-illuminating with Your brightness
the happy fires of these kingdoms!».
Thus, turning to its own melody,
it seemed to me that substance sang,
over which a double light is twinned;
and it and the others moved to their dance,
and like the swiftest of sparks
they veiled themselves from me by sudden distance.
I was in doubt and said 'Tell her, tell her!'
within myself, 'tell her,' I said, 'my lady
who quenches my thirst with her sweet drops.'
But that reverence that makes itself master
of all of me, just for a 'Be' and an 'ice',
made me bow my head like a man who dozes off.
Beatrice suffered me thus for but a little
and began, beaming on me with a smile
such, that in the fire it would make a man happy:
«According to my unerring view,
how a just vengeance was justly
punished, has put you in thought;
but I will quickly solve your mind;
and you listen, for my words
will make you a gift of great doctrine.
For not enduring, for his own good, a rein
on the power that wills, that man who was not born,
damning himself, damned all his progeny;
whence the human species lay infirm
down here for many centuries in great error,
til it pleased the Word of God to descend
where the nature, which from its maker
had distanced itself, he united to himself in person
with the sole act of his eternal love.
Now turn your face to what is now discussed:
this nature, to its maker united,
as it was created, was sincere and good;
but by itself it was then banished
from paradise, because it turned aside
from the way of truth and from its life.
The penalty, then, that the cross offered,
if measured against the assumed nature,
nothing ever so justly bit;
and likewise nothing was of such great injury,
looking at the person who suffered,
in whom such a nature was contracted.
Thus from one act diverse things came forth:
for one death pleased God and the Jews;
for it the earth trembled and the heavens opened.
It should no longer seem so hard to you now,
when it is said that a just vengeance
was afterward avenged by a just court.
But I see now your mind constrained
from thought to thought within a knot,
which with great desire waits to be untied.
You say: “I well discern what I hear;
but why God willed it, is hidden from me,
for our redemption just this way.”
This decree, brother, lies buried
from the eyes of everyone whose intellect
is not mature in the flame of love.
Truly, because at this target
many take aim and little is discerned,
I will tell why such a way was most worthy.
The divine goodness, which from itself spurns
all envy, burning in itself, so sparkles
that it unfolds the eternal beauties.
That which distills from it without an intermediary
then has no end, because its imprint does not move
when it impresses its seal.
That which rains down from it directly
is wholly free, because it is not subject
to the power of new things.
The more it conforms to it, the more it pleases it;
for the holy ardor that radiates through everything,
is more alive in that which is most like it.
Of all these gifts the human creature
has the advantage, and if one is missing,
from its nobility it must fall.
Only sin is what disenfranchises it
and makes it dissimilar to the highest good,
so that by its light it is little whitened;
and to its dignity it never returns,
unless it refills, where fault has emptied,
against wrong delight with just pains.
Your nature, when it sinned completely
in its seed, from these dignities,
as if from paradise, was removed;
nor could they be recovered, if you look
very closely, by any way,
without passing through one of these fords:
either that God solely by His courtesy
had granted pardon, or that man by himself
had made satisfaction for his folly.
Now fix your eye deep into the abyss
of the eternal counsel, as much as you can
fixed intently upon my words.
Man, within his own limits, could never
make satisfaction, for he could not go down
with humility in later obedience,
as far as he intended to go up in disobedience;
and this is the reason why man was
shut off from being able to satisfy for himself.
Thus it befitted God, with His own ways,
to restore man to his whole life,
I say with one, or indeed with both.
But because the work is so much more pleasing
to the worker, the more it represents
the goodness of the heart from which it came,
the divine goodness that imprints the world,
to proceed by all its ways
to raise you up again, was content.
Nor between the last night and the first day
was there or will there be so high or so magnificent a process,
either by the one way or by the other:
for God was more generous in giving Himself
to make man able to raise himself up,
than if He had only pardoned him;
and all the other ways were wanting
for justice, if the Son of God
had not humbled Himself to become incarnate.
“Now, to fulfill your every desire well,
I return to clarify a certain point for you,
so that you may see it there just as I do.
You say: ‘I see the water, I see the fire,
the air, and the earth, and all their mixtures
come to corruption, and last a short time;
and these things too were created things;
so that, if what has been said was true,
they ought to be safe from corruption.’
The angels, brother, and the pure country
in which you are, can be said to be created,
just as they are, in their entire being;
but the elements that you have named
and those things that are made from them
are informed by a created power.
Created was the matter that they have;
created was the informing power
in these stars that go around them.
The soul of every beast and of the plants
is drawn from a potentiated complex
by the ray and the motion of the holy lights;
but your life is breathed without an intermediary
by the highest goodness, which makes it so enamored
of Him that it then desires Him forever.
And from this you can also argue
for your resurrection, if you think back
to how the human flesh was made then
when the first parents were both made.”
