The world used to believe, to its peril,
that the fair Cyprian the mad love
radiated, turning in the third epicycle;
for which not only to her did they pay honor
with sacrifice and with votive cry,
the ancient peoples in their ancient error;
but Dione they honored and Cupid,
the one as her mother, the other as her son,
and they said that he sat in Dido’s lap;
and from her from whom I take my start
they took the name of the star
that the sun woos now from astern, now from its brow.
I did not notice my ascent to it;
but that I was within it my lady gave me
full faith, for I saw her become more beautiful.
And as a spark is seen within a flame,
and as in a voice a voice can be discerned,
when one is firm and the other goes and returns,
I saw in that light other lamps
moving in a circle, more and less swift,
according to the measure, I believe, of their eternal vision.
From a cold cloud winds never descended,
whether visible or not, so fleetly,
that they would not have seemed impeded and slow
to one who had seen those divine lights
come toward us, leaving the circling
first begun among the high Seraphim;
and within those that appeared most in front
‘Hosanna’ sounded so, that never since
have I been without desire to hear it again.
Then one of them drew nearer to us
and by himself began: «We are all ready
for your pleasure, so that you may joy in us.
We circle with the celestial Princes
in one circle, one circling, and one thirst,
of whom you on earth once said:
‘You who by understanding move the third heaven’;
and we are so full of love that, to please you,
a little quiet will be no less sweet».
After my eyes had been offered
to my lady reverently, and she
had made them content and certain of herself,
they turned back to the light which had promised
so much of itself, and «Ah, who are you?» was
my voice, impressed with great affection.
And how much and how great I saw it become
through the new joy that was added,
when I spoke, to its joys!
Having become thus, it said to me: «The world below
had me for a short time; and if it had been longer,
much of the evil that will be, would not be.
My own gladness keeps me hidden from you,
which radiates around me and conceals me
like a creature swathed in its own silk.
You loved me much, and you had good reason;
for if I had been down below, I would have shown you
of my love more than just the leaves.
That left bank which is washed
by the Rhone after it has mixed with the Sorgue,
awaited me in its time as its lord,
and that horn of Ausonia which is towned
with Bari and Gaeta and Catona,
from where the Tronto and Verde disgorge into the sea.
Already on my brow was gleaming the crown
of that land which the Danube waters
after it leaves its German banks.
And the beautiful Trinacria, that is veiled in smoke
between Pachino and Peloro, over the gulf
which receives from Eurus the greatest trouble,
not because of Typhaeus but of nascent sulfur,
would still have awaited its kings,
born through me from Charles and from Rudolf,
if bad lordship, which always embitters
the subject peoples, had not
moved Palermo to cry: ‘Die, die!’.
And if my brother could foresee this,
the avaricious poverty of Catalonia
he would already flee, so that it might not harm him;
for truly there is need to provide,
through him, or through another, so that upon his boat,
already laden, no more cargo is placed.
His nature, which from generous descended to stingy,
would have need of such a soldiery
that did not care about putting things in a chest».
«Because I believe that the high joy
that your speech pours into me, my lord,
there where every good thing ends and begins,
is seen by you as I see it,
it is more welcome to me; and this also is dear to me
because you discern it gazing into God.
You have made me glad, and so make clear to me,
since, in speaking, you have moved me to doubt
how from sweet seed, can come the bitter».
This I said to him; and he to me: «If I can
show you a truth, to what you ask
you will hold your face as you now hold your back.
The Good which the whole kingdom you ascend
turns and contents, makes its providence
be a virtue in these great bodies.
And not only are the natures provided for
in the Mind which is perfect in itself,
but they are so together with their salvation:
wherefore whatever this bow shoots
falls disposed to a foreseen end,
just like a thing directed to its mark.
If this were not so, the heaven you traverse
would so produce its effects,
that they would not be arts, but ruins;
and that cannot be, if the intellects
that move these stars are not deficient,
and deficient the First, who did not make them perfect.
Do you wish this truth to be whitened for you further?».
And I: «Not so; for I see it is impossible
for nature, in what is needed, to tire».
Whereupon he again: «Now say: would it be worse
for man on earth, if he were not a citizen?».
«Yes», I replied; «and for this I ask no reason».
«And can he be, if down below one does not live
diversely for diverse offices?
No, if your master writes well for you».
Thus he came deducing down to this point;
then he concluded: «Therefore it must be
that the roots of your effects are diverse:
so that one is born a Solon and another a Xerxes,
another a Melchizedek, and another he
who, flying through the air, lost his son.
The circling nature, which is a seal
to mortal wax, does its art well,
but does not distinguish one lodging from another.
Hence it happens that Esau is set apart
in the seed from Jacob; and Quirinus comes
from so vile a father, that he is ascribed to Mars.
Generated nature would always make its path
similar to its generators,
if divine providence did not overcome.
Now what was behind you is before you:
but so that you may know that I delight in you,
I want a corollary to cloak you.
Nature, always, if it finds fortune
discordant with itself, like any other seed
outside its own region, makes a bad showing.
And if the world down there would set its mind
on the foundation that nature lays,
following it, it would have good people.
But you twist into religion
one who was born to gird on the sword,
and you make a king of one who is fit for sermons;
wherefore your track is off the road».
