After your Charles, fair Clemenza,
had enlightened me, he told me of the deceits
that his seed was destined to receive;
but he said: “Be silent and let the years move”;
so that I can say nothing except that a just
weeping will come in the wake of your harms.
And already the life of that holy light
had turned again to the Sun that fills it
as the good that for all things is sufficient.
Ah, you deluded souls and impious creatures,
who from such a good wrench your hearts,
directing your temples toward vanity!
And behold, another of those splendors
made its way toward me, and its will to please me
it signified by brightening outwardly.
The eyes of Beatrice, which were fixed
upon me, as before, with dear assent
assured me that my desire was confirmed.
“Pray, give to my will swift compensation,
blessed spirit,” I said, “and give me proof
that I can reflect in you what I am thinking!”.
Whereupon the light that was still new to me,
from its depth, whence it was singing before,
continued, like one who delights in doing good:
“In that part of the wicked Italian
land that lies between Rialto
and the springs of the Brenta and the Piava,
a hill rises, and it does not surge very high,
from which there once descended a firebrand
that made a great assault upon the region.
From one root he and I were born:
I was called Cunizza, and I shine here
because the light of this star vanquished me;
but joyfully I grant indulgence to myself
for the cause of my fate, and it does not grieve me;
which would perhaps seem harsh to your common folk.
Of this luculent and precious joy
of our heaven who is closest to me,
great fame has remained; and before it dies,
this hundredth year will yet be fived:
see if man ought to make himself excellent,
so that the first life leaves a second one behind.
And this the present crowd does not consider,
the one that Tagliamento and Adige enclose,
nor for being beaten does it yet repent;
but it will soon be that Padua at the marsh
will change the water that bathes Vicenza,
because its people are cruel to their duty;
and where the Sile and the Cagnan join,
one so lords it and goes with his head high,
that the net is already being made to snare him.
Feltre will weep yet for the perfidy
of its impious pastor, which will be so foul
that for such a one none ever entered Malta.
Too large would be the vat
that might receive the Ferrarese blood,
and weary he who would weigh it ounce by ounce,
which this courteous priest will give
to show himself a party man; and such gifts
will be in keeping with the country’s way of life.
Up there are mirrors, you call them Thrones,
from which God in judgment shines upon us;
so that these words seem good to us.”
Here she fell silent; and made to me the semblance that she was turned to something else, through the wheel in which she placed herself as she was before. The other joy, which to me was already known as a dear thing, made itself in my sight like a fine ruby that the sun strikes. Through joy up there brightness is acquired, just as a smile here; but down below it darkens the shade without, as the mind is sad. “God sees all, and your seeing in-Hims itself,” I said, “blessed spirit, so that no wish of its own from you can be hidden. Therefore your voice, which delights the heavens always with the song of those pious fires that of six wings make their cowl, why does it not satisfy my desires? I would not now await your question, if I could in-you myself, as you in-me yourself.” “The greatest valley in which the water spreads,” his words then began, “outside that sea which garlands the earth, between discordant shores against the sun so far it goes, that it makes a meridian there where the horizon is wont to be at first. Of that valley was I a shore-dweller between the Ebro and the Macra, which by a short path separates the Genoese from the Tuscan. At almost one sunset and one sunrise Buggea sits and the land from which I was, which once made its harbor warm with its own blood. Folco I was called by those people to whom my name was known; and this heaven is imprinted by me, as I was by it; for the daughter of Belus did not burn more, troubling both Sicheo and Creusa, than I, as long as it suited my hair; nor that Rhodopean who was deluded by Demofoonte, nor Alcides when he had enclosed Iole in his heart. Not for this, however, do we repent here, but we laugh, not at the fault, which does not return to mind, but at the Power that ordained and foresaw. Here we gaze upon the art that adorns such great affection, and discern the good by which the world above turns the one below.
But so that you may carry away all your desires fulfilled
which have been born in this sphere,
it is fitting that I proceed still further.
You want to know who is in this light
that so scintillates here next to me
like a sunbeam in pure water.
Now know that within there rests tranquil
Rahab; and joined to our order,
she is sealed in its highest degree.
From this heaven, in which the shadow comes to a point
that your world makes, before any other soul
from Christ’s triumph was she assumed.
It was truly fitting to leave her as a palm
in some heaven of the high victory
that was won with both his palms,
because she favored the first glory
of Joshua in the Holy Land,
which little touches the pope’s memory.
Your city, which is a plant of him
who first turned his back on his maker
and by whom envy is so lamented,
produces and spreads the accursed flower
that has led the sheep and the lambs astray,
because it has made a wolf of the shepherd.
For this, the Gospel and the great Doctors
are left derelict, and only the Decretals
are studied, as is seen on their margins.
On this are bent the pope and cardinals;
their thoughts do not go to Nazareth,
there where Gabriel opened his wings.
But the Vatican and the other chosen parts
of Rome that have been a cemetery
for the soldiery that followed Peter,
soon will be free of the adultery.”
