Looking into his Son with the Love
that the one and the other eternally breathe forth,
the first and ineffable Worth
all that revolves through mind and through space
made with such order, that one cannot be
without tasting of him who gazes on it.
Lift then, reader, to the high wheels
with me your sight, straight to that part
where the one motion and the other strike each other;
and there begin to delight in the art
of that master who so loves it in himself,
that his eye never departs from it.
See how from there branches off
the oblique circle that bears the planets,
to satisfy the world that calls to them.
For if their path were not slanted,
much virtue in the heaven would be in vain,
and almost every potency down here dead;
and if from the straight more or less distant
were the departure, much would be lacking
both below and above in the worldly order.
Now remain, reader, upon your bench,
thinking back on this which is foretasted,
if you wish to be joyful long before you are weary.
I have set before you: now feed yourself by yourself;
for to itself twists all my care
that matter of which I am made the scribe.
The greatest minister of nature,
who with the power of heaven imprints the world
and with its light measures time for us,
with that part which is mentioned above
conjoined, was circling through the spirals
in which it ever presents itself more swiftly;
and I was with it; but of the ascent
I was not aware, except as a man is aware,
before the first thought, of its coming.
It is Beatrice who so guides
from good to better, so suddenly
that her action does not extend through time.
How brilliant in itself it had to be,
that which was within the sun where I entered,
not by color, but by light apparent!
Though I may call on genius and art and practice,
I could not so tell it that it could ever be imagined;
but it can be believed, and one may long to see it.
And if our fantasies are low
for such a height, it is no wonder;
for above the sun no eye ever went.
Such there was the fourth family
of the high Father, who always sates it,
showing how He breathes forth and how He begets.
And Beatrice began: "Give thanks,
give thanks to the Sun of the angels, who to this
sensible one has raised you by His grace."
The heart of a mortal was never so disposed
to devotion and to rendering itself to God
with all its will so quickly,
as at those words I made myself do;
and so all my love was set on Him,
that Beatrice was eclipsed in oblivion.
It did not displease her; but she so smiled at it,
that the splendor of her smiling eyes
divided my united mind among more things.
I saw many living and winning splendors
make of us a center and of themselves a crown,
sweeter in voice than in appearance shining:
thus to encircle the daughter of Latona
we sometimes see, when the air is laden,
so that it retains the thread that makes the halo.
In the court of Heaven, whence I return,
are found many dear and beautiful jewels
so that they cannot be brought from the kingdom;
and the song of those lights was one of those;
he who does not fledge himself to fly up there,
let him await news then from the mute.
Then, thus singing, those burning suns
had circled around us three times,
like stars near to the fixed poles,
ladies they seemed to me, not from a dance released,
but who stop silently, listening
until they have gathered in the new notes.
And from within one I heard begin: “When
the ray of grace, by which is kindled
true love and which then grows by loving,
multiplied in you so shines,
that it leads you up that stair
which without re-climbing no one descends;
who would deny you the wine of his vial
for your thirst, would not be free
except as water that does not fall to the sea.
You wish to know with what plants is enflowered
this garland that lovingly circles
the fair lady who strengthens you for heaven.
I was of the lambs of the holy flock
that Dominic leads along a path
where one fattens well if one does not stray.
This one who is nearest me on the right,
was brother and master to me, and he is Albert
of Cologne, and I am Thomas Aquinas.
If thus of all the others you wish to be certain,
behind my speech come with your gaze,
turning up along the blessed wreath.
That other flaming issues from the smile
of Gratian, who helped the one and the other forum
so that it pleases in paradise.
The other who next adorns our choir,
was that Peter who with the poor widow
offered his treasure to Holy Church.
The fifth light, which is most beautiful among us,
breathes such love, that all the world
below is greedy to have news of it:
within it is the lofty mind where such profound
knowledge was placed, that, if the truth is true,
a second has not risen to see so much.
Next you see the light of that taper
who below in the flesh saw most deeply
the angelic nature and its ministry.
In the other little light smiles
that advocate of Christian times
from whose Latin Augustine provided himself.
Now if you draw the eye of your mind
from light to light behind my praises,
you already remain with thirst for the eighth.
From seeing every good, within it rejoices
the holy soul that makes the fallacious world
manifest to whoever hears her well.
The body from which she was driven out lies
down in Cieldauro; and she from martyrdom
and from exile came to this peace.
See beyond, flaming, the ardent spirit
of Isidore, of Bede, and of Richard,
who in contemplation was more than a man.
This one from whom your gaze returns to me,
is the light of a spirit who in grave
thoughts it seemed to him he was slow to die:
it is the eternal light of Siger,
who, lecturing in the Street of Straw,
syllogized truths that brought him envy.”
Then, like a clock that calls us
at the hour when the bride of God rises
to sing matins to her spouse that he may love her,
in which one part and the other pulls and pushes,
sounding 'tin tin' with so sweet a note
that the well-disposed spirit swells with love;
so I saw the glorious wheel
move and render voice to voice in harmony
and in sweetness that cannot be known
except there where joy makes itself eternal.
