O senseless care of mortals,
how defective are the syllogisms
those that make you beat your wings below!
One after law and one after aphorisms
was going, and one following the priesthood,
and one to rule by force or by sophisms,
and one to rob and one to do civil business,
one in the delight of the flesh involved
toiled, and one who gave himself to idleness,
when, from all these things released,
with Beatrice I was up in heaven
so gloriously received.
After each one had returned to the
point of the circle in which he was before,
he stopped, like a candle in a candelabrum.
And I heard within that luminary
that had first spoken to me, smiling
begin, making itself more pure:
“Just as I am resplendent with its ray,
so, by looking into the eternal light,
I learn your thoughts and whence they are caused.
You doubt, and you have the will that be re-sifted
in so open and in so plain a language
my speech, that it may be level to your sense,
where before I said: ‘Where one fattens well,’
and there where I said: ‘A second has not been born’;
and here it is needful that one distinguish well.
The providence that governs the world
with that counsel in which every created
gaze is vanquished before it reaches the bottom,
so that toward her delight might go
the spouse of Him who with a loud cry
espoused her with His blessed blood,
in herself secure and also more faithful to Him,
ordained two princes in her favor,
who on this side and that should be her guides.
The one was all seraphic in ardor;
the other for wisdom on earth was
a splendor of cherubic light.
Of the one I will speak, because of both
one speaks in praising one, whichever one takes,
because to one end were their works.
Between the Topino and the water that descends
from the hill chosen by the blessed Ubaldo,
a fertile slope of a high mountain hangs,
from where Perugia feels cold and heat
from Porta Sole; and behind it weep
for their heavy yoke Nocera with Gualdo.
From this slope, there where it breaks
its steepness most, a sun was born into the world,
as this one sometimes is from the Ganges.
Therefore, whoever of that place speaks,
should not say Ascesi, for that would be to say too little,
but Orient, if he would speak properly.
He was not yet very far from his rising,
when he began to make the earth feel
some comfort from his great virtue;
for for a certain lady, as a youth, he ran into war
with his father, for her to whom, as if to death,
the gate of pleasure no one unbars;
and before his spiritual court
et coram patre he was united to her;
then from day to day he loved her more intensely.
She, deprived of her first husband,
for eleven hundred years and more, scorned and obscure,
had remained without a suitor until this man;
nor did it avail to hear that she was found secure
with Amyclas, at the sound of his voice,
by him who made the whole world fear;
nor did it avail to be so constant and fierce,
that where Mary remained below,
she wept with Christ up on the cross.
But lest I proceed too obscurely,
for these lovers take Francis and Poverty
from now on in my widespread speech.
Their harmony and their joyous looks,
love and wonder and sweet gaze
were the cause of holy thoughts;
so that the venerable Bernard
first went barefoot, and after so great a peace
he ran and, running, seemed to himself to be slow.
O unknown riches! O fertile good!
Egidius goes barefoot, Sylvester goes barefoot
after the groom, so pleasing is the bride.
Thence goes that father and that master
with his lady and with that family
that the humble cord already bound.
Nor did cowardice of heart weigh down his brow
for being the son of Pietro Bernardone,
nor for appearing wondrously despised;
but regally he opened his harsh intention
to Innocent, and from him he had
the first seal for his order.
After the poor folk grew
behind this man, whose wondrous life
would better be sung in the glory of heaven,
with a second crown was wreathed
by Honorius from the Eternal Spirit
the holy will of this archimandrite.
And then when, for the thirst of martyrdom,
in the proud presence of the Sultan
he preached Christ and the others who followed him,
and for finding the people too unripe for conversion
and not to remain in vain,
he returned to the fruit of the Italian grass,
on the harsh rock between Tiber and Arno
from Christ he received the last seal,
which his limbs bore for two years.
When to him who destined him for so much good
it pleased to draw him up to the reward
that he merited in making himself small,
to his friars, as to his rightful heirs,
he commended his most dear lady,
and commanded that they love her faithfully;
and from her bosom his illustrious soul
willed itself to move, returning to its kingdom,
and for its body wanted no other bier.
Think now what he was, who was a worthy
colleague to keep the bark
of Peter on the high seas on its right course;
and this was our patriarch;
wherefore he who follows him, as he commands,
you may discern loads good merchandise.
But his flock, for new fodder,
has grown so greedy that it cannot but
be scattered through diverse pastures;
and the more his sheep remote
and wandering go from him,
the more they return to the fold empty of milk.
There are indeed some that fear the harm
and keep close to the shepherd; but they are so few,
that for their cowls little cloth is furnished.
Now, if my words are not faint,
if your hearing has been attentive,
if what I have said you recall to mind,
in part your desire will be satisfied,
for you will see the plant from which one splinters,
and will see the rebuke that means
‘Where one fattens well, if one does not stray.’”
