As soon as the last word
the blessed flame had ceased to speak,
the holy millstone began to rotate;
and in its turn it had not revolved completely
before another one enclosed it in a circle,
and matched motion to motion and song to song;
a song that so surpasses our Muses,
our Sirens, in those sweet pipes,
as much as first splendor does that which it reflects.
As through a tender cloud there curve
two parallel and multicolored bows,
when Juno commands her handmaiden,
the outer one born from the one within,
in the manner of the speech of that wandering one
whom love consumed as the sun does vapors,
and make the people here become prescient,
through the pact that God set down with Noah,
that the world shall never more be flooded:
so of those sempiternal roses
the two garlands were revolving around us,
and so the outer one responded to the inner.
After the dance and the other great festival,
both of the singing and of the flaming
light with light, joyous and gentle,
stilled themselves together at one point and by one will,
just like the eyes which, by the pleasure that moves them,
must close and open together;
from the heart of one of the new lights
a voice moved, which to the star
made me seem a needle in turning to its where;
and began: “The love that makes me beautiful
draws me to speak of the other leader
for whom such good things are said of mine here.
It is worthy that, where one is, the other be brought in:
so that, as they fought for one cause,
so may their glory shine together.
The army of Christ, which it cost so dear
to re-arm, behind its standard
moved slowly, full of doubt, and thin,
when the Emperor who reigns forever
provided for his soldiery, which was in peril,
through grace alone, not for being worthy;
and, as was said, He came to the aid of His spouse
with two champions, by whose doing, by whose word
the straying people gathered themselves again.
In that part where the sweet Zephyr rises to open
the new leaves
with which Europe sees herself re-clothed,
not very far from the beating of the waves
behind which, because of its long course,
the sun at times hides itself from every man,
sits the fortunate Caleruega
under the protection of the great shield
in which the lion is subject and subjugates:
within it was born the loving friend
of the Christian faith, the holy athlete
gentle to his own and cruel to his enemies;
and as soon as it was created, his mind was so filled
with living virtue
that, in his mother, it made her a prophet.
After the espousals were completed
at the sacred font between him and the Faith,
where they dowered each other with mutual salvation,
the lady who for him gave the assent,
saw in a dream the marvelous fruit
that was to come from him and from his heirs;
and that he might be what he was in substance,
a spirit moved from here to name him
with the possessive of Him to whom he wholly belonged.
Dominic he was named; and I speak of him
as of the husbandman whom Christ
chose for His garden to assist Him.
Well did he seem a messenger and familiar of Christ:
for the first love that was manifest in him
was for the first counsel that Christ gave.
Often was he, silent and awake,
found on the ground by his nurse,
as if to say: ‘For this I have come’.
O his father truly Felix!
O his mother truly Giovanna,
if, interpreted, it means what they say!
Not for the world, for which one now struggles
after Ostiense and Taddeo,
but for love of the true manna
in a short time he became a great doctor;
so that he set himself to go about the vineyard
which soon grows pale if the vinedresser is wicked.
And to the See that once was more benign
to the righteous poor, not through its own fault,
but through his who sits there and degenerates,
not to dispense two or three for six,
not the fortune of the first vacancy,
not *decimas, quae sunt pauperum Dei*,
did he demand, but against the erring world
license to fight for the seed
from which these twenty-four plants gird you.
Then, with doctrine and with will together,
with the apostolic office he moved
like a torrent that a high vein presses;
and on the heretical briars struck
his impetus, most livingly there
where the resistances were thickest.
From him were then made divers streams
by which the Catholic garden is watered,
so that its saplings stand more alive.
If such was one wheel of the chariot
in which the Holy Church defended herself
and won in the field her civil strife,
well should it be quite clear to you
the excellence of the other, of whom Thomas
before my coming was so courteous.
But the track that the highest part
of its circumference made, is abandoned,
so that there is mold where the crust was.
His family, which set out straight
with its feet in his footprints, is so turned,
that it throws the one in front at the one behind;
and soon will be seen from the harvest
of the bad cultivation, when the tares
will complain that the granary is denied them.
I say truly, that he who might search page by page
our volume, would still find a page
where he could read, 'I am he who I am wont to be';
but he will not be from Casale nor from Acquasparta,
from where such men come to the Rule,
that one flees it and the other constricts it.
I am the soul of Bonaventure
from Bagnoregio, who in high offices
always put behind me the left-hand cares.
Illuminato and Augustine are here,
who were of the first barefoot poor ones
who with the cord made themselves friends of God.
Hugh of Saint Victor is here with them,
and Peter Comestor and Peter of Spain,
who down below shines in twelve small books;
Nathan the prophet and the metropolitan
Chrysostom and Anselm and that Donatus
who deigned to put his hand to the first art.
Rabanus is here, and at my side shines
the Calabrian abbot Joachim,
with a spirit of prophecy endowed.
To praise so great a paladin
I was moved by the enflamed courtesy
of friar Thomas and his discerning speech;
and with me it moved this company.”
