Imagine, whoever desires to understand well
what I now saw—and hold the image,
while I speak, like a firm rock—,
fifteen stars that in different regions
liven up the sky with such brightness
that it overcomes every density of the air;
imagine that Wain whose bosom
suffices for our sky both night and day,
so that at the turning of the pole it does not disappear;
imagine the mouth of that horn
which begins at the point of the axle
around which the first wheel revolves,
to have made of themselves two signs in the sky,
like the one the daughter of Minos made
when she felt the chill of death;
and one to have its rays within the other,
and both to revolve in such a way
that one went first and the other after;
and he will have almost a shadow of the true
constellation and of the double dance
that circled the point where I was:
since it is as far beyond our experience
as beyond the motion of the Chiana
moves the heaven that outspeeds all others.
There they sang not Bacchus, not Paean,
but three persons in divine nature,
and in one person that and the human.
The song and the turning completed their measure;
and those holy lights turned their attention to us,
making themselves happy by care after care.
Then the light in which the wondrous life
of the poor one of God was told broke the silence
among the concordant deities,
and said: “When the one straw is threshed,
when its seed is already stored,
to beat the other sweet love invites me.
You believe that in the breast whence the rib
was drawn to form the fair cheek
whose palate cost the whole world so dearly,
and in that which, pierced by the lance,
both before and after so much satisfied
that it outweighs the balance of every sin,
all the light that is lawful for human nature
to have, was all infused
by that power which made the one and the other;
and therefore you wonder at what I said above,
when I related that the good which in the fifth light is enclosed
had no second.
Now open your eyes to what I answer you,
and you will see your belief and my saying
become in the truth like the center in a circle.
That which does not die and that which can die
is nothing but the splendor of that idea
which our Sire, loving, brings to birth;
for that living light which so flows
from its shining source, that it does not disunite
from it nor from the love which is in-threed with them,
through its goodness, gathers its rays,
as if mirrored, in nine subsistences,
eternally remaining one.
Thence it descends to the ultimate potencies
down from act to act, becoming so far down,
that it makes nothing more than brief contingencies;
and these contingencies I mean to be
the generated things, which the moving heavens produce
with seed and without seed.
The wax of these and that which molds it
are not of one mode; and therefore beneath the ideal stamp
it then shines through more and less.
Whence it happens that one same tree,
according to its species, fruits better and worse;
and you are born with diverse genius.
If the wax were perfectly disposed
and the heaven were in its supreme virtue,
the light of the seal would appear in full;
but nature always gives it diminished,
operating similarly to the artist
who has the habit of his art but a hand that trembles.
Therefore if the warm love and the clear vision
of the primal power disposes and stamps,
all perfection is there acquired.
Thus was the earth once made worthy
of all animal perfection;
thus was the Virgin made pregnant;
so that I commend your opinion,
that human nature never was
nor will be such as it was in those two persons.
Now if I did not proceed further,
‘Therefore, how was he without equal?’
your words would begin.
But so that what does not seem clear may appear so,
think who he was, and the reason that moved him,
when he was told “Ask,” to make his request.
I have not spoken so that you cannot
see clearly that he was a king, who asked for wisdom
so that he might be a sufficient king;
not to know the number of
the movers up here, or if a necessary premise
with a contingent one ever made a necessary conclusion;
not if 'primum motum esse' must be granted,
or if in a semicircle one can make
a triangle such that it has no right angle.
Whence, if you note what I said and this,
kingly prudence is that unequaled seeing
at which the arrow of my intention strikes;
and if to “arose” you direct your clear eyes,
you will see it has respect only
to kings, who are many, and the good are rare.
With this distinction take my saying;
and so it can stand with what you believe
of the first father and of our Delight.
And let this always be lead at your feet,
to make you move slow like a weary man
to the yes and the no that you do not see:
for he is well down among the fools,
who without distinction affirms and denies
in the one case as in the other;
because it happens that many times the current opinion
bends to the false side,
and then emotion binds the intellect.
Far more than in vain from shore he departs,
because he does not return such as he set out,
who fishes for the truth and does not have the art.
And of this there are open proofs in the world:
Parmenide, Melisso, and Brisso, and many,
who went on and knew not where;
so did Sabellio and Arrio and those fools
who were like swords to the Scriptures
in making the straight faces crooked.
Let people not yet be too sure
in judging, like one who estimates
the grain in the field before it is ripe;
for I have seen all winter long, at first,
the thorn-bush show itself rigid and fierce,
then bear the rose upon its summit;
and I have seen a ship straight and swift
run the sea for its whole journey,
perish at the end at the entrance of the harbor.
Let not dame Berta and sir Martino believe,
because they see one steal, another make an offering,
that they see them within the divine counsel;
for the one can rise, and the other can fall.”
