From the center to the circle, and so from the circle to the center
water moves in a round vase,
according as it is struck from without or within:
into my mind there came at once the case
of this which I say, as soon as was silent
the glorious life of Thomas,
because of the similarity that was born
of his speech and that of Beatrice,
whom it pleased thus to begin, after him:
“This man has need, and he does not tell it you
either with his voice or yet with his thought,
to go to the root of another truth.
Tell him if the light with which your substance
is enflowered, will remain with you
eternally just as it is now;
and if it remains, tell how, after
you are remade visible,
it can be that it does not harm your sight.”
As, by greater joy spurred and drawn,
at times those who dance in a circle
raise their voices and gladden their movements,
so, at the ready and devout oration,
the holy circles showed new joy
in their turning and in their wondrous notes.
Whoever laments that here one dies
to live up there, has not seen here
the refreshment of the eternal rain.
That one and two and three that ever lives
and ever reigns in three and in two and in one,
uncircumscribed, and circumscribing all,
was sung three times by each one
of those spirits with such a melody,
that for any merit it would be a just reward.
And I heard in the most divine light
of the smaller circle a modest voice,
perhaps as was that of the angel to Mary,
answer: "As long as the festival
of paradise shall be, so long our love
will radiate around us such a garment.
Its brightness follows our ardor;
the ardor, our vision, and that is as great
as the grace it has beyond its own merit.
When the glorious and holy flesh
is clothed on us again, our person
will be more pleasing for being all complete;
for which will increase what is given us
of freely-given light by the highest good,
a light that makes us fit to see him;
whence the vision must needs increase,
the ardor that from it is kindled increase,
the radiance that from that ardor comes increase.
But just as a coal that gives forth flame,
and by its bright incandescence overpowers it,
so that its own appearance is preserved;
so this effulgence that now encircles us
will be surpassed in appearance by the flesh
that for now the earth covers over;
nor will such great light be able to fatigue us:
for the organs of the body will be strong
for all that which will be our delight."
So sudden and eager seemed to me
both the one and the other chorus in saying "Amen!",
that they truly showed their desire for their dead bodies:
perhaps not only for themselves, but for their mothers,
for their fathers, and for the others who were dear
before they were sempiternal flames.
And behold, around them, of equal brightness,
a luster was born above the one that was there,
in the manner of a horizon that brightens.
And just as at the rising of early evening
new apparitions begin across the sky,
so that the sight seems and seems not real,
it seemed to me that I began to see new substances
there, and that they made a circle
outside the other two circumferences.
Oh true sparkling of the Holy Spirit!
how sudden and incandescent it became
to my eyes which, conquered, did not endure it!
But Beatrice so beautiful and smiling
showed herself to me, that it must be left
among those sights the mind cannot follow.
Then my eyes regained the power
to raise themselves again; and I saw myself translated
alone with my lady to a higher salvation.
Well did I perceive that I was more uplifted,
by the fiery smile of the star,
which seemed to me more ruddy than its wont.
With all my heart and with that speech
that is one in all, I made a holocaust to God,
as was befitting the new grace.
And the ardor of the sacrifice was not yet
exhausted from my breast, when I knew
that offering had been accepted and auspicious;
for with such light and such redness
splendors appeared to me within two rays,
that I said: “O Helios, who so adorns them!”
As, picked out by lesser and by greater
lights, the Galaxy so whitens between the poles of the world
that it makes even wise men doubt;
so constellated, in the depth of Mars,
those rays made the venerable sign
that joints of quadrants make in a circle.
Here my memory vanquishes my genius;
for that cross was flashing Christ,
so that I cannot find a worthy example;
but he who takes his cross and follows Christ
will yet excuse me for what I leave out,
seeing in that whiteness Christ gleam.
From horn to horn, and between the top and the base,
lights were moving, sparkling brightly
in their meeting together and in their passing:
so are seen here, straight and crooked,
swift and slow, changing their aspect,
the tiny particles of bodies, long and short,
moving through the ray with which is sometimes striped
the shadow that, for its defense,
people with genius and art acquire.
And as a viol and a harp, in a taut tuning
of many strings, make a sweet tinkling
to one by whom the note is not understood,
so from the lights that appeared to me there,
a melody was gathered through the cross
that ravished me, without my understanding the hymn.
I was well aware that it was of high praises,
because to me came “Rise again” and “Conquer,”
like to one who does not understand, yet hears.
I was so much in love with it all,
that until then there had been nothing
that had bound me with such sweet bonds.
Perhaps my words seem too daring,
placing second the pleasure of the beautiful eyes,
in gazing on which my desire finds its rest;
but he who perceives that the living seals
of every beauty have more effect higher up,
and that I had not there turned myself to them,
can excuse me for that of which I accuse myself
to excuse myself, and see that I speak the truth:
for the holy pleasure is not here excluded,
because it becomes, in ascending, more pure.
