A benign will, in which there melts
always the love that breathes aright,
as greed does in the iniquitous will,
put silence to that sweet lyre,
and made quiet the holy chords
that the right hand of heaven loosens and pulls.
How will they be deaf to just prayers,
those substances that, to give me the wish
that I should pray to them, were of one accord to be silent?
It is right that he grieve without end
who, for love of a thing that does not last
eternally, divests himself of that love.
As through the tranquil and pure serene skies
a sudden fire shoots from time to time,
moving the eyes that were standing secure,
and it seems a star that changes place,
except that from the part whence it is kindled
nothing is lost, and it itself lasts a short while:
so from the horn that extends to the right
to the foot of that cross a star ran
from the constellation that there resplends;
nor did the gem depart from its ribbon,
but ran along the radial strip,
which seemed like fire behind alabaster.
So piously did the shade of Anchises offer himself,
if our greatest muse deserves faith,
when in Elysium he perceived his son.
"O my own blood, O super-infused
grace of God, to whom, as to you,
has the gate of heaven ever been twice unlocked?"
Thus that light spoke: so I attended to him;
then I turned my face back to my lady,
and by the one and the other I was stupefied;
for within her eyes there burned a smile
such, that I thought with my own to touch the bottom
of my glory and of my paradise.
Then, joyous to hear and to see,
the spirit added things to his beginning,
that I did not understand them, so profoundly did he speak;
nor by choice was he hidden from me,
but by necessity, for his concept
surpassed the mark of mortals.
And when the bow of ardent affection
was so vented that his speech descended
toward the mark of our intellect,
the first thing that was understood by me,
was, “Blessed be You, three and one,
who in my seed are so courteous!”
And he continued: “A pleasing and long fast,
drawn from reading the great volume
where white nor brown is ever changed,
you have fulfilled, my son, within this light
in which I speak to you, thanks to her
who for the high flight clothed you with feathers.
You believe that to me your thought flows
from Him who is First, just as there rays
from the one, if it is known, the five and the six;
and therefore who I am and why I appear
more joyous to you, you do not ask,
than any other in this happy throng.
You believe the truth; for the lesser and the great
of this life gaze into the mirror
in which, before you think it, you unfold your thought;
but so that the sacred love in which I watch
with perpetual sight and which makes me thirst
with sweet desire, may be better fulfilled,
let your voice, secure, bold, and happy,
sound out your will, sound out your desire,
to which my answer is already decreed!”
I turned to Beatrice, and she heard
before I spoke, and smiled a sign to me
which made the wings of my volition grow.
Then I began thus: “Affection and intellect,
when the First Equality appeared to you,
for each of you became of one weight,
because the Sun that illumined and burned you,
with its heat and with its light is so equal,
that all comparisons are inadequate.
But will and argument in mortals,
for the reason that is manifest to you,
are feathered differently on their wings;
whence I, who am a mortal, feel myself in this
inequality, and therefore I do not give thanks
except with my heart for your paternal welcome.
But I do implore you, living topaz
who ingem this precious jewel,
that you may make me satisfied with your name.”
«O my bough in whom I took pleasure
merely by awaiting you, I was your root»:
such a beginning, in replying, he made for me.
Then he said to me: «The one from whom is named
your family and who a hundred years and more
has circled the mountain on the first cornice,
was my son and was your great-grandfather:
it is indeed fitting that his long labor
you should shorten for him with your good works.
Florence, within the ancient circle of her walls,
from which she still takes both her tierce and nones,
abode in peace, sober and chaste.
She had no necklace, had no coronet,
no embroidered gowns, no girdle
that was more to be seen than the person.
Not yet did the daughter, at her birth, cause fear
for the father, for the age and the dowry
did not on this side and that flee the measure.
She had no houses empty of family;
Sardanapalus had not yet arrived there
to show what can be done in a chamber.
Montemalo was not yet surpassed
by your Uccellatoio, which, as it is surpassed
in the rising up, so shall it be in the fall.
I saw Bellincion Berti go about girt
with leather and bone, and his lady come from the mirror
with her face unpainted;
and I saw the lord of the Nerli and of the Vecchio
be content with plain-dressed leather,
and their ladies at the spindle and the distaff.
Oh fortunate women! Each one was certain
of her own burial place, and none as yet
was deserted in her bed because of France.
One would keep watch in caring for the cradle,
and, consoling, would use the speech
that first delights fathers and mothers;
another, drawing the threads from the distaff,
would tell tales with her family
of the Trojans, of Fiesole, and of Rome.
Such a marvel would have been held then
a Cianghella, a Lapo Salterello,
as Cincinnatus or Cornelia would be now.
To so restful, to so beautiful
a life of citizens, to so faithful
a citizenry, to so sweet a dwelling,
Mary gave me, called upon in high cries;
and in your ancient Baptistery
at once I became Christian and Cacciaguida.
Moronto was my brother and Eliseo;
my lady came to me from the Po valley,
and from there your surname was made.
Then I followed the Emperor Conrad;
and he girded me with his knighthood,
so much through good work did I come into his favor.
Behind him I went to meet the iniquity
of that law whose people usurp,
through the fault of the shepherds, your justice.
There was I by that foul folk
unwrapped from the fallacious world,
the love of which defiles many souls;
and I came from martyrdom to this peace.”
