O our poor nobility of blood,
if you make people glory in you
down here where our affection languishes,
it will never be a wondrous thing to me:
for there where appetite is not warped,
I mean in Heaven, I gloried in it.
Truly you are a cloak that quickly shortens:
so that, if one does not add to it day by day,
time goes around with its shears.
With the 'you' that was first offered in Rome,
in which its family perseveres less,
my words began again;
at which Beatrice, who was a little apart,
smiling, seemed like the one who coughed
at the first written fault of Guinevere.
I began: «You are my father;
you give me all boldness to speak;
you raise me so, that I am more than I.
Through so many streams is filled with happiness
my mind, which makes a joy of itself
because it can endure it and not shatter.
Tell me then, my dear first-fruit,
who were your ancestors and what were the years
that were marked in your boyhood;
tell me of the sheepfold of Saint John
how large it was then, and who were the people
within it worthy of the highest seats».
As a coal glows into flame at the blowing of the winds,
so I saw that light grow brighter at my blandishments;
and as to my eyes it made itself more beautiful,
so with a voice more sweet and gentle,
but not with this modern speech,
it said to me: “From that day when 'Ave' was said
to the birth in which my mother, who is now a saint,
was relieved of me with whom she was heavy,
to its Lion five hundred fifty
and thirty times came this fire
to be rekindled beneath its paw.
My ancestors and I were born in the place
where the last ward is first found
by him who runs in your annual game.
Let it suffice to hear this of my ancestors:
who they were and whence they came here,
it is more honest to be silent than to speak.
All those who at that time were there
able to bear arms between Mars and the Baptist,
were a fifth of those who are now alive.
But the citizenry, which is now mixed
with folk from Campi, from Certaldo, and from Fighine,
was seen pure in the lowliest artisan.
Oh how much better it would be for those people
I speak of to be neighbors, and for you to have your border at Galluzzo
and at Trespiano,
than to have them inside and endure the stench
of the peasant from Aguglione, and of him from Signa,
who already for graft has his eye sharp!
If the people that in the world most degenerates
had not been a stepmother to Caesar,
but benign like a mother to her son,
one who is made a Florentine and trades and traffics
would have turned back to Simifonti,
where his grandfather went begging;
Montemurlo would still belong to the Conti;
the Cerchi would be in the parish of Acone,
and perhaps the Buondelmonti in Valdigrieve.
Always the confusion of persons
was the beginning of the city's ill,
as in your body is the food that is added on;
and a blind bull falls more suddenly
than a blind lamb; and many times one sword cuts
more and better than five.
If you look at Luni and Urbisaglia,
how they are gone, and how after them go
Chiusi and Senigallia,
to hear how families are undone
will not seem a new or hard thing to you,
since cities too have their end.
All your things have their death,
just as you do; but it is hidden in some
that last long, while lives are short.
And as the turning of the heaven of the moon
covers and uncovers the shores without pause,
so does Fortune with Florence:
therefore it should not seem a marvelous thing,
what I shall say of the great Florentines
whose fame is hidden in time.
I saw the Ughi and I saw the Catellini,
Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, and Alberichi,
already in decline, illustrious citizens;
and I saw, as great as they were ancient,
the one of the Sannella, the one of the Arca,
and Soldanieri and Ardinghi and Bostichi.
Over the gate that at present is burdened
by new felony of so much weight
that soon it will be the shipwreck of the boat,
were the Ravignani, from whom has descended
Count Guido and whoever of the name
of the great Bellincione has since taken.
The one of the Pressa already knew how
one ought to rule, and Galigaio had
already in his house the hilt and pommel gilded.
Great already was the column of Vair,
Sacchetti, Giuochi, Fifanti, and Barucci,
and Galli, and those who blush for the bushel.
The stock from which the Calfucci were born
was already great, and already were drawn
to the curule chairs Sizii and Arrigucci.
Oh what men I saw who are undone
by their pride! and the balls of gold
made Florence flower in all her great deeds.
So did the fathers of those
who, whenever your church is vacant,
make themselves fat while sitting in consistory.
The overweening clan that turns dragon-like
behind one who flees, and to one who shows his teeth
or his purse, grows meek as a lamb,
was already rising, but of lowly people;
so that it did not please Ubertin Donato
that then his father-in-law made him their kinsman.
Already the Caponsacco had in the market
come down from Fiesole, and already were
good citizens Giuda and Infangato.
I will say a thing incredible and true:
in the small circle one entered by a gate
that was named for those of the Pera.
Each one who bears the fair insignia
of the great baron whose name and whose worth
the feast of Thomas re-comforts,
from him had knighthood and privilege;
although with the people now joins
he who girds it with a border.
Already there were Gualterotti and Importuni;
and Borgo would still be more quiet,
if of new neighbors it had been fasting.
The house from which your weeping was born,
through the just disdain that has killed you
and put an end to your happy life,
was honored, it and its kinsmen:
o Buondelmonte, how badly you fled
its nuptials at the urgings of others!
Many would be happy, who now are sad,
if God had committed you to the Ema
the first time that you came to the city.
But it was fitting for that mutilated stone
that guards the bridge, that Florence should make
a victim in her final peace.
With these peoples, and with others with them,
I saw Florence in such repose,
that she had no reason for which to weep.
With these peoples I saw her populace glorious
and just, so much that the lily
was never placed reversed upon a staff,
nor through division made vermilion.»
