As he who came to Clymene, to make certain
of that which he had heard against himself,
he who still makes fathers to sons scarce;
such was I, and such was I perceived
both by Beatrice and by the holy lamp
that had before for me changed its place.
Wherefore my lady “Send forth the flame
of your desire,” she said to me, “so that it may issue
well-marked with the internal stamp:
not so that our knowledge may grow
by your speaking, but so that you may dare
to state the thirst, so that one may pour for you.”
“O my dear root who so uplifts yourself,
that, as earthly minds see
a triangle cannot contain two obtuse angles,
so you see contingent things
before they exist in themselves, gazing at the point
to which all times are present;
while I was joined with Virgil
up on the mountain that cures the souls
and descending in the world of the dead,
were told to me of my future life
grave words, although I feel myself
quite foursquare to the blows of fortune;
for which my desire would be content
to understand what fortune draws near to me:
for a foreseen arrow comes more slowly.”
Thus said I to that same light
that had spoken to me before; and as Beatrice
willed, my wish was confessed.
Not with ambiguous words, in which the foolish people
once were entangled before was slain
the Lamb of God who takes away sins,
but with clear words and with precise
speech that paternal love replied,
enclosed and apparent in its own smile:
"Contingency, which does not extend beyond the volume
of your material world,
is all depicted in the eternal sight;
yet from this it takes no necessity,
any more than from the eye that mirrors it
a ship that descends with the current.
From there, just as sweet harmony from an organ
comes to the ear, there comes to my sight
the time that is being prepared for you.
As Hippolytus departed from Athens
because of his pitiless and perfidious stepmother,
so from Florence you must depart.
This is willed, and this is already sought,
and soon it will be accomplished by him who plots it
there where Christ is bought and sold all day.
The blame will follow the injured party
in the outcry, as is the custom; but vengeance
will be a witness to the truth that dispenses it.
You shall leave everything you love
most dearly; and this is the arrow
that the bow of exile shoots first.
You shall prove how salty tastes
the bread of others, and how hard a path it is
to go down and up another’s stairs.
And that which will weigh most upon your shoulders
will be the wicked and senseless company
with which you will fall into that valley;
for all ungrateful, all mad and impious
it will turn against you; but, soon after,
it, not you, will have its temples bloody.
Of its bestiality its outcome
will be the proof; so that it will be a thing of honor for you
to have made a party for yourself.
Your first refuge and your first lodging
will be the courtesy of the great Lombard
who on the ladder bears the holy bird;
for he will have for you such benign regard,
that of the doing and the asking, between you two,
the first will be that which among others is slower.
With him you will see the one who was impressed,
at his birth, so by this strong star,
that his deeds will be notable.
The people have not yet taken notice of him
because of his young age, for only nine years
have these spheres revolved around him;
but before the Gascon deceives the high Henry,
sparks of his virtue will appear
in his disregard for silver and for toils.
His magnificences will be known
still further, so that his enemies
will not be able to keep their tongues silent about them.
Look to him and to his benefits;
through him many people will be transformed,
changing condition, rich and mendicants;
and you will bear this written in your mind
about him, and you will not tell it»; and he said things
incredible to those who will be present.
Then he added: «Son, these are the glosses
on that which was told to you; behold the snares
that are hidden behind a few revolutions.
Yet I do not wish you to envy your neighbors,
since your life is futured
far beyond the punishing of their perfidies».
When, by its silence, the holy soul showed it had finished
putting the weft
onto that warp I had offered it,
I began, like one who longs,
while doubting, for counsel from a person
who sees and wills rightly and loves:
"I see well, my father, how time spurs
toward me, to deal me a blow
such that it is heaviest for him who most gives way;
for which it is good that I arm myself with foresight,
so that, if my dearest place is taken from me,
I may not lose the others because of my poems.
Down through the world of endless bitterness,
and through the mountain from whose lovely summit
the eyes of my lady lifted me,
and then through heaven, from light to light,
I have learned that which, if I retell it,
will for many have the taste of a harsh acid;
and if I am a timid friend to the truth,
I fear to lose my life among those
who will call this time ancient."
The light in which my treasure smiled,
whom I found there, first became scintillating,
like a golden mirror in a sunbeam;
then it answered: "A conscience dark
either from its own or from another's shame
will surely feel your speech to be harsh.
But nonetheless, all falsehood set aside,
make your entire vision manifest;
and just let them scratch where the itch is.
For if your voice shall be offensive
at the first taste, vital nourishment
it will leave behind, when it has been digested.
This cry of yours will do as does the wind,
which strikes the highest peaks the most;
and this is no small argument for honor.
For this reason there have been shown to you in these wheels,
on the mountain, and in the sorrowful valley,
only those souls who are of famous note,
because the mind of one who hears does not rest
nor fix its faith on an example that has
its root unknown and hidden,
nor on any other proof that is not apparent."
