Already he was rejoicing only in his word,
that blessed mirror, and I was tasting
mine, tempering the bitter with the sweet;
and that lady who was leading me to God
said: “Change your thought; think that I am
near to Him who unburdens every wrong.”
I turned me to the loving sound
of my comfort; and what love I then saw
in her holy eyes, here I abandon:
not only because I distrust my own speech,
but because of the mind that cannot return
so far upon itself, unless another guide it.
This much I can say again of that moment,
that, gazing on her again, my affection
was freed from every other desire,
until the eternal pleasure, which directly
was shining in Beatrice, from her fair face
contented me with its secondary aspect.
Conquering me with the light of a smile,
she said to me: “Turn yourself and listen;
for not only in my eyes is paradise.”
As one sometimes sees here
the affection in the look, if it is so great
that the whole soul is rapt by it,
so in the flashing of the holy fire,
to which I turned, I recognized the desire
in him to speak with me a while longer.
He began: “In this fifth threshold
of the tree that lives from its top
and is always fruitful and never loses leaf,
are blessed spirits who, below, before
they came to heaven, were of great renown,
so that every muse would be enriched by them.
Therefore look upon the horns of the cross:
he whom I shall name will there perform the act
that its swift fire makes in a cloud.”
I saw a light drawn along the cross
at the naming of Joshua, as it was made;
nor was the word known to me before the deed.
And at the name of the great Maccabee
I saw another move, wheeling,
and joy was the whip to the top.
Thus for Charlemagne and for Roland
my intent gaze followed two of them,
as an eye follows its falcon flying.
Afterwards William and Renoart
and the duke Godfrey drew my sight
along that cross, and Robert Guiscard.
Then, moved and mingled among the other lights,
the soul who had spoken to me showed me
what an artist he was among the singers of heaven.
I turned to my right side
to see in Beatrice my duty,
signified by speech or by a gesture;
and I saw her eyes so pure,
so joyous, that her semblance
surpassed its other and its most recent state.
And as, by feeling more delight
in doing good, a man from day to day
perceives that his own virtue is advancing,
so I perceived that my circling round
together with the heaven had increased its arc,
seeing that miracle more adorned.
And such as is the change in a brief span
of time in a pale lady, when her face
casts off the burden of its shame,
such was it to my eyes, when I had turned,
because of the whiteness of the temperate star,
the sixth, which had received me into itself.
I saw within that jovial torch
the sparkling of the love that was therein
trace out before my eyes our human speech.
And as birds risen from a riverbank,
as if rejoicing in their pasture,
make of themselves now a round, now another flock,
so within the lights holy creatures
were flying and singing, and making of themselves
now D, now I, now L in their figures.
First, singing, they moved to their own notes;
then, becoming one of these signs,
they paused a little while and held their peace.
O Pegasean goddess who makes spirits
glorious and renders them long-lived,
and they with you the cities and the realms,
illumine me with yourself, so that I may set forth
their figures as I have conceived them:
let your power appear in these short verses!
They showed themselves, then, in five times seven
vowels and consonants; and I noted
the parts, just as they seemed spoken to me.
‘DILIGITE IUSTITIAM,’ were the first
verb and noun of all the picture;
‘QUI IUDICATIS TERRAM,’ were the last.
Then in the M of the fifth word
they remained arranged; so that Jupiter
seemed there to be silver picked out with gold.
And I saw other lights descend to where
the top of the M was, and there grow quiet,
singing, I believe, the Good that moves them to itself.
Poi, come nel percuoter d’i ciocchi arsi
surgono innumerabili faville,
onde li stolti sogliono agurarsi,
resurger parver quindi più di mille
luci e salir, qual assai e qual poco,
sì come ’l sol che l’accende sortille;
e quïetata ciascuna in suo loco,
la testa e ’l collo d’un’aguglia vidi
rappresentare a quel distinto foco.
Quei che dipinge lì, non ha chi ’l guidi;
ma esso guida, e da lui si rammenta
quella virtù ch’è forma per li nidi.
L’altra bëatitudo, che contenta
pareva prima d’ingigliarsi a l’emme,
con poco moto seguitò la ’mprenta.
O sweet star, what and how many gems
showed me that our justice
is the effect of the heaven you engem!
For which I pray the mind in which begins
your motion and your virtue, that it may look again
at where the smoke comes from that spoils your ray;
so that once more it may now be angered
by the buying and selling inside the temple
that was walled with signs and with martyrdoms.
O militia of heaven whom I contemplate,
pray for those who are on earth,
all gone astray behind the bad example!
Once war was waged with swords;
but now it is made by taking away, now here, now there,
the bread that the pious Father closes to no one.
But you who write only to cancel,
think that Peter and Paul, who died
for the vineyard that you spoil, are still alive.
You can well say: "I have fixed my desire
so on him who willed to live alone
and who by dances was drawn to martyrdom,
that I know neither the fisherman nor Paul."
