There appeared before me with its wings outspread
the beautiful image that, in sweet fruition,
the joyous, interwoven souls composed;
each one seemed a ruby in which
a ray of sun burned so intensely
that it was reflected back into my eyes.
And that which I must now portray,
no voice ever carried, nor ink ever wrote,
nor was it ever by fantasy conceived;
for I saw and also heard the beak speak,
and sound in its voice both "I" and "my,"
when in the concept it was "we" and "our."
And it began: "For being just and pious
am I exalted here to that glory
that lets itself not be surpassed by desire;
and on earth I left my memory
so made, that the wicked people there
commend it, but do not follow the story."
Thus one single heat from many embers
makes itself felt, as from many loves
issued only a single sound from that image.
Wherefore I then: "O perpetual flowers
of the eternal gladness, who make one
all your fragrances seem to me,
solve for me, by breathing forth, the great fast
that for a long time has held me in hunger,
finding for it no food on earth.
Well do I know that, if in Heaven another realm
makes divine justice its mirror,
yours does not apprehend it through a veil.
You know how attentively I prepare myself
to listen; you know what that doubt is
which for me is a fast so ancient."
Like a falcon that comes from its hood,
moves its head and with its wings applauds itself,
showing its desire and making itself beautiful,
I saw that sign become, which with praise
of divine grace was woven,
with songs such as are known by him who up there rejoices.
Then it began: “He who turned the compass
to the world’s extremity, and within it
distinguished so much hidden and manifest,
could not so impress His power
on the whole universe, that His Word
should not remain in infinite excess.
And this makes certain that the first proud one,
who was the summit of every creature,
through not waiting for light, fell unripe;
and hence it appears that every lesser nature
is too small a receptacle for that good
which has no end and measures itself by itself.
Therefore your vision, which must needs
be one of the rays of the Mind
with which all things are filled,
cannot by its nature be so powerful
that it should not discern its origin
to be far beyond what is apparent to it.
Therefore into the sempiternal justice
the sight that your world receives,
like an eye through the sea, enters in;
for, though from the shore it sees the bottom,
in the open sea it sees it not; and nonetheless
it is there, but its being deep conceals it.
There is no light, if it comes not from the serene
that is never troubled; rather it is darkness
or the shadow of the flesh or its poison.
Now is laid wide open to you the hiding place
that hid from you the living justice,
about which you made such frequent question;
for you would say: ‘A man is born on the bank
of the Indus, and there is none there who speaks
of Christ, nor who reads, nor who writes;
and all his desires and good acts
are, as far as human reason sees,
without sin in life or in speech.
He dies unbaptized and without faith:
where is this justice that condemns him?
where is his fault, if he does not believe?’.
Now who are you, who would sit on the bench,
to judge from a thousand miles away
with a sight that is short by a span?
Certainly for him who subtilizes with me,
if the Scripture were not over you,
there would be wondrous cause for doubt.
Oh earthly animals! oh gross minds!
The primal Will, which is good in itself,
from Itself, which is the highest good, never moved.
So much is just as is consonant with it:
no created good draws it to itself,
but it, by radiating, is the cause of it.”
As over the nest circles
the stork, after she has fed her young,
and as the one who is fed looks up at her;
so did it become, and so I raised my brows,
the blessed image, which moved its wings
driven by so many counsels.
Wheeling it sang, and said: “As
are my notes to you, who do not understand them,
so is eternal judgment to you mortals.”
Then those shining fires grew quiet
of the Holy Spirit, still in the sign
that made the Romans revered by the world.
It began again: “To this kingdom
never rose one who did not believe in Christ,
neither before nor after He was nailed to the wood.
But see: many cry ‘Christ, Christ!’,
who will be in judgment far less near
to Him, than such a one who does not know Christ;
and such a Christian the Ethiopian will condemn,
when the two colleges shall be parted,
the one eternally rich and the other destitute.
What will the Persians be able to say to your kings
when they see that volume opened
in which are written all their disgraces?
There will be seen, among the works of Albert,
that which will soon move the pen,
for which the kingdom of Prague shall be a desert.
There will be seen the grief that over the Seine
he brings, by falsifying the coin,
he who will die by a wild boar's stroke.
There will be seen the pride that makes one thirst,
which makes the Scot and the Englishman mad,
so that he cannot stay within his own border.
There shall be seen the luxury and soft living
of him of Spain and of him of Bohemia,
who never knew valor, nor ever willed it.
There shall be seen for the Cripple of Jerusalem
his goodness marked down with an I,
when the contrary will be marked with an M.
There shall be seen the avarice and the baseness
of him who guards the island of fire,
where Anchises ended his long life;
and to make it understood how paltry it is,
his record will be in clipped letters,
that will note much in a little space.
And the foul works will be plain to all
of the uncle and his brother, who so famous
a nation and two crowns have made a blot.
And he of Portugal and he of Norway
there shall be known, and he of Rascia
who has ill seen the coin of Venice.
O happy Hungary, if she lets herself
be no longer mistreated! and happy Navarre,
if she would arm herself with the mountain that girds her!
And each must believe that already, as a pledge
of this, Nicosia and Famagusta
lament and rail because of their beast,
who does not part from the side of the others».
