When he who lights all the world
descends so far from our hemisphere
that the day on every side is consumed,
the sky, which is kindled by him alone before,
suddenly makes itself visible again
through many lights, in which one light shines;
and this act of the heavens came to my mind
when the sign of the world and of its leaders
in its blessed beak fell silent;
because all of those living lights,
shining far more brightly, began songs
that from my memory are fleeting and have fallen.
O sweet love that cloaks yourself in a smile,
how ardent you appeared in those flares
which had breath only of holy thoughts!
After the dear and lucid gems
with which I saw the sixth light bejeweled
put silence to their angelic chimes,
I seemed to hear the murmur of a river
that flows down clear from rock to rock,
showing the abundance of its mountain crest.
And as sound at the neck of the lute
takes its form, and as at the opening
of the bagpipe the wind that enters it,
so, with no delay of waiting removed,
that murmur of the eagle rose up
through its neck, as if it were hollow.
There it became voice, and from there it issued
through its beak in the form of words,
such as the heart awaited where I wrote them.
“The part in me that sees and endures the sun
in mortal eagles,” it began to me,
“now wishes to be regarded intently,
for of the fires from which I form my figure,
those from which the eye in my head sparkles,
are the highest of all their ranks.
He who shines in the middle as the pupil,
was the singer of the Holy Spirit,
who transported the ark from town to town:
now he knows the merit of his song,
inasmuch as it was the effect of his own counsel,
by the reward which is its equal.
Of the five who make a circle for my eyelid,
he who is closest to my beak,
consoled the little widow for her son:
now he knows how dearly it costs
not to follow Christ, by the experience
of this sweet life and of the opposite.
And he who follows in the circumference
of which I speak, on the upper arc,
delayed death through true penitence:
now he knows that the eternal judgment
is not changed, when a worthy prayer
down there makes today’s fate into tomorrow’s.
The other who follows, with the laws and me,
under good intention that bore evil fruit,
to give way to the shepherd, made himself a Greek:
now he knows how the evil deduced
from his good action is not harmful to him,
although the world is destroyed by it.
And he whom you see in the downward sloping arc,
was William, for whom that land weeps
that mourns for a living Charles and Frederick:
now he knows how heaven falls in love
with a just king, and in the semblance
of his radiance he still makes it visible.
Who down in the erring world would believe
that Ripheus the Trojan in this round circle
was the fifth of the holy lights?
Now he knows much of that which the world
cannot see of divine grace,
although his sight does not discern the bottom.”
Like a lark that soars in the air,
first singing, and then falls silent, content
with the final sweetness that sates it,
so seemed to me the image of the imprint
of the eternal pleasure, by whose desire
each thing becomes what it is.
And although I was, in my doubting,
there almost like glass to the color that clothes it,
I could not bear to wait a time in silence,
but from my mouth, “What things are these?”,
was pushed by the force of its own weight:
for which I saw great festivals of sparkling light.
Then afterward, with its eye more kindled,
the blessed sign answered me
so as not to keep me suspended in wonder:
“I see that you believe these things
because I say them, but you do not see how;
so that, if they are believed, they are hidden.
You do as one who the thing by name
grasps well, but its quiddity
cannot see if another does not bring it forth.
The kingdom of heaven suffers violence
from warm love and from living hope,
which conquers the divine will:
not in the way that man overcomes man,
but it conquers it because it wants to be conquered,
and, conquered, it conquers with its own benevolence.
The first life of the eyebrow and the fifth
make you marvel, because in them you see
the region of the angels painted.
They did not leave their bodies, as you believe,
Pagan, but Christian, in firm faith,
the one in the feet to suffer, the other in the feet which had suffered.
For one of them from Hell, whence one never returns
with a good will, came back to his bones;
and this was the reward of living hope:
of living hope, which put its power
into the prayers made to God to resurrect him,
so that his will might be moved.
The glorious soul of whom is spoken,
returned to the flesh, in which he was for little time,
believed in Him who had the power to help him;
and believing, was kindled with so great a fire
of true love, that at his second death
he was worthy to come to this joyful game.
The other, through grace that from so deep
a fountain drips, that never has a creature
pushed its eye as far as the first wave,
placed all his love down there on righteousness:
for which, from grace to grace, God opened
his eye to our future redemption;
wherefore he believed in it, and from then on
endured no more the stench of paganism;
and he reproached the perverse peoples.
Those three ladies whom you saw at the right wheel
were his for baptism,
more than a thousand years before baptizing was.
O predestination, how remote
is your root from those sights
that do not see the First Cause in its entirety!
And you mortals, hold yourselves back
in judging: for we, who see God,
do not yet know all the elect;
and such a lack is sweet to us,
because our good is perfected in this good,
that what God wills, we also will.”
Thus by that divine image,
to make my short sight clear,
was a sweet medicine given to me.
And as to a good singer a good citharist
makes the quiver of the string follow,
by which the song acquires more pleasure,
so, while it spoke, I remember
that I saw the two blessed lights,
just as the blinking of eyes agrees,
move their little flames with the words.
