My eyes were already fixed again on the face
of my lady, and my mind with them,
and from every other intent it was removed.
And she was not smiling; but "If I were to smile,"
she began to me, "you would become such as
was Semele when she was made of ashes:
for my beauty, which along the stairs
of the eternal palace more ignites,
as you have seen, the higher one ascends,
if it were not tempered, so shines,
that your mortal power, to its splendor,
would be a branch that thunder splits.
We are raised to the seventh splendor,
which under the breast of the burning Lion
now radiates down mixed with its power.
Fix your mind behind your eyes,
and make of them mirrors for the figure
that in this mirror will be apparent to you."
Whoever could know what was the pasture
of my gaze in that blessed aspect
when I turned myself to another care,
would know how pleasing it was to me
to obey my celestial guide,
counterbalancing the one side with the other.
Inside the crystal which bears the name,
circling the world, of its dear leader
under whom all malice lay dead,
of golden color in which a ray shines through
I saw a ladder erected upward
so high, that my sight did not follow it.
I also saw descending down the steps
so many splendors, that I thought every light
that appears in heaven, was diffused from there.
And as, by their natural custom,
the rooks together, at the beginning of the day,
move to warm their cold feathers;
then others go away without returning,
others turn themselves back to where they started,
and others, wheeling, make their stay;
such a manner it seemed to me was there
in that sparkling that came together,
as soon as it struck a certain step.
And the one that stopped nearest to us,
became so bright, that I said in my thought:
'I see well the love that you signal to me.
But she from whom I await the how and the when
of speaking and of keeping silent, is still; so I,
against my desire, do well that I do not ask.'
So she, who saw my silence
in the sight of Him who sees all,
said to me: “Release your warm desire.”
And I began: “My own merit
does not make me worthy of your reply;
but for her who grants me leave to ask,
O blessed life that are hidden
within your own joy, make known to me
the reason that has placed you so near to me;
and tell me why in this wheel is silent
the sweet symphony of paradise,
which through the others below sounds so devoutly.”
«You have mortal hearing just as you have mortal sight»,
he answered me; «for which reason there is no singing here
for the same reason that Beatrice has not smiled.
Down the rungs of the holy ladder
I descended this far only to give you welcome
with my speech and with the light that cloaks me;
nor did greater love make me swifter,
for more and as much love burns up there from here,
as the flaming makes manifest to you.
But the high charity, which makes us servants
ready for the counsel that governs the world,
allots here as you observe».
«I see well», I said, «O sacred lamp,
how free love in this court
suffices to follow eternal providence;
but this is what seems hard for me to discern,
why you alone were predestined
to this office among your companions».
I had not yet come to the last word,
when the light made its middle its center,
spinning on itself like a swift millstone;
then the love that was within it answered:
«Divine light is focused upon me,
penetrating through this in which I in-womb myself,
whose power, joined with my vision,
raises me so far above myself, that I see
the supreme essence from which it is milked.
From this comes the joy with which I flame;
because to my sight, as much as it is clear,
I match the clarity of the flame.
But that soul in heaven that is most illumined,
that seraph who has his eye most fixed on God,
would not satisfy your demand,
because what you ask so enters the abyss
of the eternal statute
that it is cut off from every created sight.
And to the mortal world, when you return,
report this, so that it may not presume
to move its feet toward such a mark again.
The mind, which here is light, on earth is smoke;
so consider how it can do there below
what it cannot do even when heaven assumes it».
His words so prescribed to me,
that I left the question and drew back
to ask him humbly who he was.
«Between the two shores of Italy rise rocks,
and not very distant from your homeland,
so that thunders sound far lower,
and they make a hump that is called Catria,
beneath which is consecrated a hermitage,
which used to be disposed to worship alone».
Thus the third speech began to me again;
and then, continuing, he said: «There
in the service of God I made myself so firm,
that just with foods seasoned with olive liquor
I lightly passed through heats and frosts,
content in contemplative thoughts.
That cloister used to render to these heavens
fruitfully; and now it is made so vain,
that soon it must be revealed.
In that place I was Peter Damian,
and Peter the Sinner I was in the house
of Our Lady on the Adriatic shore.
Little mortal life was left to me,
when I was sought and drawn to that hat,
which is ever poured from bad to worse.
Cephas came, and the great vessel came
of the Holy Spirit, thin and barefoot,
taking their food from any inn.
Now modern pastors want those on this side and that
to prop them up and to lead them,
so heavy are they, and one to hoist them from behind.
They cover their palfreys with their mantles,
so that two beasts go under a single skin:
O patience that endures so much!».
At this voice I saw more little flames
descend from step to step and wheel around,
and every turn made them more beautiful.
They came around this one and stopped,
and made a cry of so high a sound,
that here it could not be resembled;
nor did I understand it, the thunder so overcame me.
