Overwhelmed with amazement, to my guide
I turned, like a little child who runs
always to where he has the most trust;
and she, like a mother who comes to the aid
at once of her pale and breathless son
with her voice, which is wont to soothe him well,
said to me: “Do you not know you are in Heaven?
and do you not know that Heaven is all holy,
and what is done here comes from a good zeal?
How the song would have transformed you,
and I by smiling, you can now imagine,
since the cry has moved you so much;
in which, if you had understood its prayers,
already would be known to you the vengeance
that you will see before you die.
The sword of here above cuts not in haste
nor late, except to the seeming of him
who awaits it in desire or in fear.
But turn yourself now toward the others;
for you will see very illustrious spirits,
if, as I say, you guide your gaze back.”
As it pleased her, I turned my eyes back,
and saw a hundred little spheres that together
grew more beautiful with their mutual rays.
I was like one who represses in himself
the point of his desire, and does not dare
to ask, so much he fears excess;
and the largest and most brilliant
of those pearls came forward,
to make my wish content with itself.
Then within it I heard: “If you could see
the charity that burns among us,
your thoughts would have been expressed.
But so that you, by waiting, do not delay
your high goal, I will make answer
only to your thought, since you hold back so.
That mountain on whose slope Cassino lies
was once frequented on its summit
by the people deceived and ill-disposed;
and I am he who first brought up there
the name of Him who brought to earth
the truth that so exalts us;
and so much grace shone down on me,
that I drew back the surrounding towns
from the impious worship that seduced the world.
These other fires were all contemplative
men, kindled by that warmth
which gives birth to holy flowers and fruits.
Here is Macarius, here is Romuald,
here are my brothers who within the cloisters
kept their feet firm and held their hearts steadfast.”
And I to him: “The affection that you show
in speaking with me, and the good semblance
that I see and note in all your ardors,
has so expanded my confidence,
as the sun does the rose when, opened,
it becomes to the full extent of its power.
Therefore I pray you, and you, father, assure me
if I can receive so much grace, that I
may see you with your image uncovered.”
At which he: “Brother, your high desire
will be fulfilled up in the final sphere,
where all others are fulfilled, and mine.
There, every desire is perfect, mature, and whole;
in that one alone
is every part there where it always was,
because it is not in a place and has no poles;
and our ladder extends up to it,
which is why it is thus stolen from your sight.
Up to there the patriarch Jacob
saw it extend its highest part,
when it appeared to him so laden with angels.
But, to climb it, now no one lifts
his feet from the earth, and my Rule
remains for the wasting of the pages.
The walls that used to be an abbey
have become dens of thieves, and the cowls
are sacks full of bad flour.
But heavy usury is not so raised
against the pleasure of God, as is that fruit
that makes the heart of monks so mad;
for whatever the Church holds, all of it
is for the people who ask in God’s name,
not for relatives nor for anything more foul.
The flesh of mortals is so soft,
that down there a good beginning is not enough
from the birth of the oak to the making of the acorn.
Peter began without gold and without silver,
and I with prayer and with fasting,
and Francis humbly his convent;
and if you look at the beginning of each,
then look again to where it has run,
you will see the white has turned to brown.
Truly Jordan turned backward
and the sea fleeing, when God willed, was more
marvelous to see than the aid to come here.”
Thus he said to me, and then he gathered himself
to his college, and the college drew tight;
then, like a whirlwind, it all swirled upward.
The sweet lady behind them pushed me
with a single gesture up that ladder,
so her power my own nature overcame;
nor ever down here where one ascends and descends
naturally, was there a motion so swift
that it could be compared to my wing.
If I ever return, reader, to that devout
triumph for which I often weep for
my sins and beat my breast,
you would not have so quickly drawn and put
your finger in the fire, as I saw the sign
that follows the Bull and was inside of it.
O glorious stars, o light pregnant
with great power, from which I recognize
all, whatever it may be, of my genius,
with you was rising and with you was hiding
he who is father of all mortal life,
when I first felt the Tuscan air;
and then, when grace was granted to me
to enter the high wheel that turns you,
your region was allotted to me.
To you devoutly now my soul sighs,
to acquire power for the hard pass
that draws it to itself.
«You are so near to the final salvation»,
began Beatrice, «that you ought
to have your lights clear and sharp;
and therefore, before you further in-her yourself,
look down again, and see how much of the world
I have already made to be beneath your feet;
so that your heart, as joyful as it can be,
may present itself to the triumphant host
that comes happy through this round ether».
With my sight I returned through all
the seven spheres, and I saw this globe
such, that I smiled at its vile semblance;
and that counsel I approve as best
which holds it for least; and he who thinks on other things
can be called truly righteous.
I saw the daughter of Latona burning
without that shadow which was the cause
for me once to believe it rare and dense.
The aspect of your son, Hyperion,
I there sustained, and I saw how Maia and Dione
move around and near him.
Then appeared to me the tempering of Jove
between the father and the son; and then it was clear to me
the varying they make of their where;
and all seven showed themselves to me,
how great they are and how swift they are
and how they are in distant orbits.
The little threshing-floor that makes us so ferocious,
as I was turning with the eternal Twins,
appeared to me all, from the hills to the river mouths;
then I turned my eyes again to the beautiful eyes.
