As the bird, among the beloved boughs,
perched on the nest of its sweet young
during the night that hides things from us,
who, to see their desired faces
and to find the food with which to feed them,
in which heavy labors are pleasing to it,
anticipates the time on an open branch,
and with ardent affection awaits the sun,
gazing fixedly just so that the dawn may be born;
so my lady stood erect
and attentive, turned toward the region
beneath which the sun shows less haste:
so that, seeing her suspended and eager,
I became like one who, desiring,
would wish for something else, and in hoping is content.
But little was the time between one moment and the next,
of my waiting, I say, and of the sight
of the heaven growing more and more bright;
and Beatrice said: “Behold the hosts
of the triumph of Christ and all the fruit
gathered by the turning of these spheres!”.
It seemed to me that her face was all aflame,
and her eyes were so full of gladness,
that I must pass over it without description.
As in the serene full moons
Trivia smiles among the eternal nymphs
who paint the sky through all its vaults,
I saw above thousands of lanterns
a sun that was kindling all of them,
as ours does the supernal sights;
and through the living light there shone through
the shining substance so bright
to my sight, that it could not sustain it.
Oh Beatrice, sweet and dear guide!
She said to me: "What overwhelms you
is a power from which nothing is shielded.
Here is the wisdom and the power
that opened the roads between heaven and earth,
for which there was once so long a desire."
As fire from a cloud unfastens itself
to expand so that it has no room there,
and against its nature falls down to earth,
so did my mind, among that banquet,
made greater, go out of itself,
and what it became it cannot remember.
"Open your eyes and look at what I am;
you have seen things, that powerful
you have become to sustain my smile."
I was like one who recovers
from a forgotten vision and who strives
in vain to bring it back to mind,
when I heard this offer, worthy
of so much gratitude that it never fades
from the book that reviews the past.
If now all those tongues should sound
that Polyhymnia with her sisters made
most rich with their sweetest milk,
to help me, a thousandth of the truth
would not be reached, in singing of the holy smile
and how it made the holy face so pure;
and so, in figuring paradise,
the sacred poem must leap,
like one who finds his path cut off.
But he who might think of the ponderous theme
and the mortal shoulder that is burdened with it,
would not blame it if it trembles under it:
it is not a sea-passage for a little boat,
that which my daring prow goes cleaving,
nor for a helmsman who would spare himself.
“Why does my face so enamor you,
that you do not turn to the beautiful garden
that blossoms beneath the rays of Christ?
Here is the rose in which the divine Word
made itself flesh; here are the lilies
by whose fragrance the good path was taken.”
Thus Beatrice; and I, who to her counsels
was wholly ready, again gave myself
to the battle of my weak eyelids.
As by a ray of sun, that purely passes
through a fractured cloud, a meadow of flowers
was seen by my eyes, once covered in shadow;
so I saw many throngs of splendors,
struck from above by burning rays,
without seeing the source of the lightning flashes.
O benign power that so imprints them,
you exalted yourself on high, to grant me space
for my eyes there that were not strong enough for you.
The name of the beautiful flower that I always invoke
both morning and evening, completely constrained
my soul to gazing on the greatest fire;
and as both my eyes depicted for me
the quality and the quantity of the living star
that triumphs up there as it triumphed down here,
down through the heaven descended a little torch,
formed in a circle in the guise of a crown,
and encircled her and revolved around her.
Whatever melody sounds sweetest
down here and most draws the soul to itself,
would seem a cloud that, torn apart, thunders,
compared to the sound of that lyre
with which was crowned the beautiful sapphire
by which the clearest heaven is ensapphired.
"I am angelic love, who circles
the high gladness that breathes from the womb
that was the dwelling place of our desire;
and I shall circle, Lady of Heaven, while
you follow your son, and make more divine
the supreme sphere because you enter there."
Thus the circulated melody
sealed itself, and all the other lights
made the name of Mary resound.
The royal mantle of all the volumes
of the world, which most fervently and quickens
in the breath of God and in His ways,
had its inner shore above us
so distant, that its appearance,
there where I was, did not yet appear:
therefore my eyes did not have the power
to follow the crowned flame
that rose up after her seed.
And like a little infant who toward its mother
stretches its arms, after it has taken milk,
through the soul that even outwardly is inflamed;
each of those splendors stretched upward
with its summit, so that the high affection
that they had for Mary was made plain to me.
Then they remained there in my sight,
'Regina celi' singing so sweetly,
that the delight has never departed from me.
Oh how great is the abundance that is stored up
in those richest arks that were
down here good sowers for the harvest!
Here one lives and rejoices in the treasure
that was acquired weeping in the exile
of Babylon, where one left the gold.
Here triumphs, under the high Son
of God and of Mary, in his victory,
and with the old and the new council,
he who holds the keys of such glory.
