“O chosen fellowship at the great supper
of the blessed Lamb, who so feeds you
that your desire is always full,
if by the grace of God this man foretastes
of that which falls from your table,
before death prescribes his time,
give heed to his immense affection
and bedew him somewhat: you drink
always from the fount whence comes what he thinks.”
Thus Beatrice; and those happy souls
made themselves spheres upon fixed poles,
flaming, at times, in the guise of comets.
And as circles in the works of clocks
so turn that the first, to one who heeds,
seems still, and the last to fly;
so did those carols, different-
ly dancing, of their richness
make me estimate, swift and slow.
From the one that I noted of most dearness
I saw a fire so happy issue forth,
that it left none there of greater brightness;
and three times around Beatrice
it turned with a song so divine,
that my fantasy does not repeat it to me.
Therefore the pen leaps and I do not write it:
for our imagination for such folds,
let alone our speech, is too coarse a hue.
“O my holy sister who so entreats us
devoutly, by your ardent affection
you unloose me from that beautiful sphere.”
After stopping, the blessed fire
directed its breath to my lady,
which spoke as I have said.
And she: “O eternal light of the great man
to whom Our Lord left the keys,
which he brought down, of this wondrous joy,
test this man on points light and grave,
as it pleases you, concerning the faith,
by which you once walked upon the sea.
If he loves well and hopes well and believes,
is not hidden from you, for you have your sight there
where every thing is seen depicted;
but because this kingdom has made citizens
by the true faith, to glorify it,
it is good that speech of it should come to him.”
As the bachelor student arms himself and does not speak
until the master proposes the question,
to give reasons for it, not to resolve it,
so did I arm myself with every reason
while she was speaking, to be ready
for such a questioner and such a profession.
«Say, good Christian, make yourself manifest:
what is faith?». At which I raised my brow
to that light from which this breathed;
then I turned to Beatrice, and she made ready
signs to me that I should pour forth
the water from my inner fount.
«May the Grace that grants me to confess,»
I began, «before the high first-centurion,
make my concepts be well expressed.»
And I continued: «As the truthful stylus
wrote of it, father, your dear brother
who with you set Rome on the good path,
faith is the substance of things hoped for
and the evidence of things not seen;
and this seems to me its quiddity.»
Then I heard: «You perceive rightly,
if you well understand why he placed it
among the substances, and then among the arguments.»
And I then: «The profound things
which here grant me their appearance,
to the eyes down there are so hidden,
that their existence is there in belief alone,
upon which high hope is founded;
and therefore it takes on the meaning of substance.
And from this belief it is our task
to syllogize, without having other sight:
therefore it holds the meaning of argument.»
Then I heard: «If all that is acquired
below through doctrine, were so understood,
there would be no place for the sophist’s wit.»
So breathed from that enkindled love;
then he added: «This coin has been well run through
for its alloy and its weight already;
but tell me if you have it in your purse.»
At which I: «Yes, I have it, so bright and so round,
that in its stamp nothing makes me doubt.»
Next there came from the deep light
that was shining there: «This precious jewel
upon which every virtue is founded,
from where did it come to you?». And I: «The ample rain
of the Holy Spirit, which is poured out
upon the old and upon the new parchments,
is a syllogism that has so concluded it for me
so sharply, that compared to it
every other demonstration seems obtuse.»
I heard then: «The old and the new
proposition that so concludes for you,
why do you hold it for divine speech?».
And I: «The proof that discloses the truth to me,
are the works that followed, for which nature
never heats iron nor strikes an anvil.»
The reply was to me: «Say, who assures you
that those works existed? The very same thing
that wants to be proved, and no other, attests it to you.»
«If the world turned to Christianity,»
said I, «without miracles, this one alone
is such that the others are not the hundredth part:
for you entered poor and fasting
into the field, to sow the good plant
that once was a vine and now is made a briar.»
This being finished, the high, holy court
resounded through the spheres a ‘We praise God’
in the melody that is sung up there.
And that baron who, examining me thus from branch to branch,
had already drawn me on,
so that we were approaching the final leaves,
began again: “The Grace that lovingly graces
your mind has opened your mouth
up to now as it ought to be opened,
so that I approve what has emerged;
but now you must express what you believe,
and whence it was offered to your belief.”
“O holy father, O spirit who sees
what you so believed that you outran
toward the sepulchre more youthful feet,”
I began, “you wish me to declare
the substance here of my ready faith,
and you also asked the cause of it.
And I reply: I believe in one God,
sole and eternal, who moves all of heaven,
Himself unmoved, with love and with desire;
and for such belief I have not only proofs
physical and metaphysical, but am given it
also by the truth that rains down from here
through Moses, through prophets and through psalms,
through the Gospel and through you who wrote
after the ardent Spirit made you holy;
and I believe in three eternal Persons, and these
I believe to be one essence so one and so three,
that it allows the joining of ‘are’ and ‘is’.
Of the profound divine condition
that I now touch on, my mind is sealed
many times by the evangelical doctrine.
This is the beginning, this is the spark
which then dilates into a living flame,
and like a star in heaven shines in me.”
As the lord who hears what pleases him,
thereupon embraces his servant, rejoicing
for the news, as soon as he is silent;
so, blessing me with song,
three times he circled me, as soon as I was silent,
the apostolic light at whose command
I had spoken: so much did I please him in my speaking!
