If it ever happens that the sacred poem
to which both heaven and earth have set their hand,
so that it has made me lean for many years,
should overcome the cruelty that locks me out
of the beautiful sheepfold where I slept a lamb,
an enemy to the wolves that make war on it;
with another voice now, with another fleece
I shall return as poet, and upon the font
of my baptism I shall take the crown;
because in the faith, that makes souls known
to God, there I entered, and then
Peter for its sake so circled my brow.
Then a light moved toward us
from that sphere from which came the first fruit
that Christ left of His vicars;
and my lady, full of happiness,
said to me: “Look, look: here is the baron
for whom, down there, Galicia is visited.”
Just as when the dove alights
near its companion, one to the other displays,
circling and murmuring, their affection;
so did I see the one by the other great
glorious prince be welcomed,
praising the food that feasts them up there.
But after the greeting was completed,
silent *coram me* each one fixed himself,
so ignited that he overcame my gaze.
Laughing then, Beatrice said:
“Glorious life through whom the generosity
of our basilica was written,
make hope resound in this height:
you know it, for you figure it as many times
as Jesus showed the three most favor.”
“Lift your head and be assured:
for that which comes up here from the mortal world
must be matured by our rays.”
This comfort from the second fire
came to me; wherefore I lifted my eyes to the mountains
which had bowed them before with too much weight.
“Since by grace our Emperor wills that you confront,
before your death,
Him in His most secret hall with His counts,
so that, having seen the truth of this court,
you may with that strengthen hope, which brings good love below,
in yourself and in others,
say what it is, say how it blossoms
in your mind, and say whence it came to you.”
Thus the second light continued.
And that pious one who guided the feathers
of my wings to so high a flight,
anticipated my reply thus:
“The Church Militant has no son
with greater hope, as is written
in the Sun that irradiates all our host:
therefore it is granted him that from Egypt
he come to Jerusalem to see,
before his term of service is prescribed.
The other two points, which are asked not for knowing
but so that he may report back
how much this virtue is a pleasure to you,
to him I leave them, for they will not be hard
nor of boastfulness; and let him to this respond,
and may the grace of God allow it him.”
Like a disciple who follows a doctor
ready and willing in what he is expert,
so that his goodness may be revealed,
"Hope," I said, "is a certain expectation
of future glory, which is produced
by divine grace and preceding merit.
From many stars this light comes to me;
but he first distilled it in my heart
who was the supreme singer of the supreme leader.
'Let them hope in you,' in his theody
he says, 'those who know your name':
and who does not know it, if he has my faith?
You distilled it in me, with his distilling,
then in your epistle; so that I am full,
and on others I rain back your downpour."
While I was saying this, within the living breast
of that fire there trembled a flash
sudden and frequent in the manner of lightning.
Then he breathed: "The love with which I burn
still for the virtue that followed me
unto the palm and to the leaving of the field,
wills that I breathe again to you who delight
in her; and it is pleasing to me that you say
what it is that hope promises you."
And I: "The new and the ancient scriptures
place the mark, and it points it out to me,
of the souls that God has made His friends.
Isaiah says that each one, clothed
in its own land, shall be in a double garment:
and its own land is this sweet life;
and your brother, much more plainly,
where he treats of the white robes,
makes this revelation manifest to us."
And first, after the end of these words,
'Let them hope in thee' was heard from above us;
to which all the carols responded.
Then among them a light grew so bright
that if the Crab had such a crystal,
winter would have a month of a single day.
And as a maiden rises and goes and enters the dance,
a happy virgin, only to do honor
to the new bride, not for any fault,
so I saw the brightened splendor
come to the two who were turning in a measure
such as was fitting to their ardent love.
It placed itself there in the song and in the wheel;
and my lady kept her gaze upon them,
just like a bride, silent and motionless.
“This is he who lay upon the breast
of our pelican, and this is he who was
from upon the cross elected to the great office.”
My lady spoke thus; nor for that, however,
did she move her attentive gaze
any more after her words than before.
Just as one is who squints and strains
to see the sun when it is slightly eclipsed,
who, through seeing, becomes unseeing;
such did I become before that final fire
while it was said: “Why do you dazzle yourself
to see a thing that has no place here?
My body is earth in the earth, and it will be there
so long with the others, until our number
equals the eternal purpose.
With the two robes in the blessed cloister
are the only two lights that ascended;
and this you will carry back to your world.”
At this voice the flaming circle
grew still, along with the sweet mingling
that was made by the sound of the threefold breath,
just as, to end fatigue or risk,
the oars, which first struck back into the water,
all come to rest at a whistle’s sound.
Ah, how deeply was I stirred in my mind,
when I turned to see Beatrice,
at not being able to see, though I was
near her, and in the happy world!
