While I was in doubt for my extinguished sight,
from the blazing flame that had extinguished it
a breath came forth that made me attentive,
saying: “While you recover your sense
of the vision you have consumed in me,
it is good that you compensate for it by reasoning.
Begin then; and say to what your soul
is aimed, and take it for a reason that
the sight in you is lost and not dead:
because the lady who through this divine
region leads you, has in her gaze
the power that the hand of Ananias had.”
I said: “At her pleasure, and soon or late,
may the remedy come to my eyes, which were gates
when she entered with the fire with which I always burn.
The good that makes this court content,
is Alpha and Omega of all the scripture
that Love reads to me, lightly or strongly.”
That same voice that had taken the fear
of the sudden dazzling away from me,
set me to the task of reasoning once more;
and said: “Certainly with a finer sieve
it is fitting you make clear: you must say
who aimed your bow at such a target.”
And I: “By philosophical arguments
and by authority that from here descends
such love must be imprinted in me:
for the good, as good, once understood,
so enkindles love, and all the more
the more of goodness it contains within itself.
Therefore to the Essence wherein is such advantage
that every good that is found outside of It
is nothing other than a light of Its ray,
more than to any other must be moved
the mind, in loving, of each one who discerns
the truth on which this proof is founded.
Such truth is laid plain to my intellect
by him who demonstrates to me the first love
of all the sempiternal substances.
It is laid plain by the voice of the true Author,
who says to Moses, speaking of Himself:
‘I will make you see all goodness.’
You also lay it plain to me, beginning
the high proclamation that cries out the mystery
from here down there above every other call.”
And I heard: “Through human intellect
and through authorities in accord with it,
the supreme of your loves looks to God.
But say as well if you feel other chords
pulling you toward Him, so that you may sound out
with how many teeth this love bites you.”
The holy intention was not hidden
of the eagle of Christ; rather, I perceived
where he wished to lead my profession.
Therefore I began again: “All those bites
that can make the heart turn to God
have converged in my charity:
for the being of the world and my own being,
the death that He sustained that I might live,
and that which every faithful one like me hopes for,
with the aforementioned living knowledge,
have drawn me from the sea of twisted love,
and placed me on the shore of the rightful one.
The leaves with which the whole garden is leaved
of the eternal Gardener, I love so much
as good from Him is brought to them.”
As soon as I was silent, a most sweet song
resounded through the heaven, and my lady
said with the others: 'Holy, holy, holy!'.
And as one is awakened by a sharp light
through the visual spirit that runs
to the splendor that goes from tunic to tunic,
and the awakened one abhors what he sees,
so unknowing is the sudden wakefulness
until the estimative power comes to its aid;
so from my eyes every last mote
Beatrice drove away with the ray of her own,
which shone from more than a thousand miles:
wherefore better than before I then saw;
and almost stupefied I asked
about a fourth light that I saw among us.
And my lady: 'Within those rays
the first soul gazes lovingly on its maker,
the soul that the first power ever created.'
As the branch that bends its top
in the passage of the wind, and then rises
by its own power that lifts it up,
so I did for as long as she was speaking,
being astounded, and then a desire to speak
with which I burned made me confident again.
And I began: “O apple that ripe
were produced alone, o ancient father
to whom every bride is daughter and daughter-in-law,
devoutly as I can I supplicate you
that you speak to me: you see my wish,
and to hear you sooner I do not say it.”
Sometimes a covered animal stirs,
so that its affection must appear
through the movements its covering makes;
and similarly the primal soul
made transparent to me through its cover
how joyfully it came to please me.
Then it breathed forth: “Without its being proffered
by you, your wish I discern better
than you whatever thing is most certain to you;
because I see it in the truthful mirror
that makes of itself a counterpart to other things,
and nothing makes of him a counterpart to itself.
You wish to hear how long it is since God placed me
in the exalted garden, whence this lady
prepared you for so long a stair,
and how long was the delight to my eyes,
and the true cause of the great displeasure,
and the idiom that I used and that I made.
Now, my son, not the tasting of the wood
was in itself the cause of so great an exile,
but only the transgressing of the boundary.
From there whence your lady moved Virgil,
four thousand three hundred and two volumes
of the sun I desired this council;
and I saw it return to all the lights
of its path nine hundred and thirty
times, while I was on earth.
The tongue that I spoke was all extinct
before the unfinishable work
was attempted by the people of Nimrod:
for no rational product ever,
due to human pleasure which is renewed
by following the heavens, was ever durable.
A natural work it is that man should speak;
but whether this way or that, nature then leaves
it to you to do according to your pleasure.
Before I descended to the infernal anguish,
I was the name on earth for the highest good
from which comes the joy that swathes me;
and El he was called later: and this is fitting,
for the custom of mortals is like a leaf
on a branch, that goes away and another comes.
On the mountain that rises highest from the wave,
I was, with a life both pure and dishonest,
from the first hour to that which is second
to the sixth hour, as the sun changes quadrant.”
