‘To the Father, to the Son, to the Holy Spirit,’
began, ‘glory!’, all of paradise,
so that the sweet song intoxicated me.
What I saw seemed to me a smile
of the universe; wherefore my drunkenness
entered through my hearing and my sight.
Oh joy! oh ineffable happiness!
oh life complete with love and peace!
oh wealth secure without desire!
Before my eyes the four torches
were standing lit, and the one that came first
began to grow more vivid,
and became such in his appearance,
as Jupiter would become, if he and Mars
were birds and they exchanged feathers.
The providence, which there allots
turn and office, in the blessed choir
had placed silence on every side,
when I heard: «If I change color,
do not marvel, for, as I speak,
you will see all of these change color too.
He who usurps on earth my place,
my place, my place, which is vacant
in the presence of the Son of God,
has made of my cemetery a sewer
of blood and of stench; whereby the perverse one
who fell from up here, is placated down there».
Of that color with which the opposing sun
paints a cloud at evening and at morning,
I saw then all of Heaven besprinkled.
And as an honest lady who remains
sure of herself, and for another's fault,
just by listening, becomes timid,
so Beatrice changed her semblance;
and such an eclipse I believe there was in Heaven
when the supreme Power suffered.
Then his words proceeded
with a voice so transformed from itself,
that his semblance did not change more:
«The bride of Christ was not nurtured
on my blood, on Linus's, on that of Cletus,
to be used for the acquisition of gold;
but for the acquisition of this happy life
both Sixtus and Pius and Callixtus and Urban
shed their blood after much weeping.
It was not our intention that at the right hand
of our successors one part should sit,
and the other part on the other side of the Christian people;
nor that the keys which were granted to me,
should become a sign on a standard
that fought against the baptized;
nor that I should be the figure on a seal
for privileges sold and deceitful,
for which I often blush and flash with fire.
In shepherd's clothing rapacious wolves
are seen from up here in all the pastures:
O defense of God, why do you yet lie still?
Of our blood, Cahorsines and Gascons
are preparing to drink: O good beginning,
to what a vile end must you fall!
But the high Providence, that with Scipio
defended the glory of the world for Rome,
will bring swift succor, as I conceive;
and you, my son, who because of your mortal weight
will yet return below, open your mouth,
and do not hide that which I do not hide».
Just as of frozen vapors flakes
downward our air, when the horn
of the celestial goat is touched by the sun,
so upward I saw the ether become adorned
and flake with triumphant vapors
who had made a sojourn with us there.
My sight followed their semblances,
and followed until the medium, through its muchness,
took from it the passage of the more distant.
Wherefore the lady, who saw me released
from looking upward, said to me: "Cast down
your sight and see how you have turned."
From the hour that I had first looked
I saw that I had moved through the whole arc
that the first clime makes from its middle to its end;
so that I saw beyond Gades the mad passage
of Ulysses, and on this side near the shore
on which Europa was made a sweet burden.
And more of the site of this little threshing-floor
would have been discovered to me; but the sun was proceeding
under my feet, advanced a sign and more.
The enamored mind, which always courts
my lady, to bring back
the eyes to her burned more than ever;
and if nature or art made baits
to capture the eyes, in order to possess the mind,
in human flesh or in its paintings,
all of them gathered together would seem as nothing
compared to the divine pleasure that shone on me,
when I turned to her smiling face.
And the power that her gaze granted me,
from the fair nest of Leda tore me away,
and into the swiftest heaven thrust me.
Its parts, most living and most high,
are so uniform that I cannot say
which place Beatrice chose for me.
But she, who saw my desire,
began, smiling so joyfully
that God seemed to rejoice in her face:
“The nature of the world, which stills
the center and moves all else around it,
from here begins as from its goal;
and this heaven has no other where
than the divine mind, in which is kindled
the love that turns it and the virtue that it rains down.
Light and love of one circle contain it,
as this contains the others; and that precinct
He who enfolds it alone understands.
Its motion is not measured by another’s,
but the others are measured by this one,
as ten is by its half and by its fifth;
and how time in such a vessel holds
its roots and in the others its leaves,
can now be manifest to you.
Oh cupidity that so submerges mortals
beneath you, that no one has the power
to draw his eyes out of your waves!
Indeed the will blossoms in men;
but the continuous rain converts
the true plums into blighted ones.
Faith and innocence are found
only in little children; then each one
flees before the cheeks are covered.
One, still lisping, keeps the fast,
who then devours, with his tongue unbound,
any food in any month;
and one, lisping, loves and heeds
his mother, who, with full speech,
then desires to see her buried.
Thus the white skin turns to black
at the first sight of the lovely daughter
of him who brings the morn and leaves the eve.
You, so that you not be filled with wonder,
should think that on earth there is no one who governs;
wherefore the human family goes so far astray.
But before January is entirely un-wintered
by the hundredth part that is neglected down there,
these supernal circles will so radiate,
that the tempest that is so long awaited,
will turn the sterns to where the prows are,
so that the fleet will run straight;
and true fruit will come after the flower.”
