After that she who imparadises my mind
opened the truth about the present life
of wretched mortals,
as in a mirror the flame of a torch
is seen by one who has it lit behind him,
before he has it in sight or in thought,
and he turns around to see if the glass
tells him the truth, and sees that it accords
with it as a note with its meter;
so my memory recalls
that I did, looking into the beautiful eyes
where Love made the cord to capture me.
And as I turned and my eyes were touched
by that which appears in that volume,
whenever one gazes well upon its revolution,
I saw a point that radiated a light
so keen, that the eye on which it focuses
must close because of the strong keenness;
and what star from here seems smallest
would seem a moon, placed with it
as a star is placed with a star.
Perhaps as close as a halo seems
to gird the light that paints it
when the vapor that bears it is most dense,
a circle of fire revolved around the point,
so swift, that it would have vanquished
that motion which most swiftly girds the world;
and this was circumcincted by another,
and that by the third, and the third then by the fourth,
the fourth by the fifth, and then the fifth by the sixth.
Above followed the seventh so spread out
already in breadth, that Juno’s messenger
would be too narrow to contain it whole.
So the eighth and ninth; and each one
moved more slowly, according to how it was
in number more distant from the one;
and that one had the most sincere flame
which was least distant from the pure spark,
I believe, because it partakes more of its truth.
My lady, who saw me in care
strongly suspended, said: “From that point
depend the heavens and all of nature.
Look at that circle which is most joined to it;
and know that its motion is so swift
for the fiery love by which it is spurred.”
And I to her: “If the world were placed
with the order that I see in those wheels,
what has been proposed would have sated me;
but in the sensible world one can see
the spheres to be so much more divine,
the more they are remote from the center.
Wherefore, if my desire is to have its end
in this wondrous and angelic temple
that has only love and light for its confine,
I must yet hear how the model
and the copy do not go in the same way,
for I by myself contemplate this in vain.”
“If your fingers are not for such a knot
sufficient, it is no marvel:
so hard, from not being tried, has it been made!”
Thus my lady; then she said: “Take
what I shall tell you, if you wish to be sated;
and around it make yourself subtle.
The corporeal circles are ample and constrained
according to the more and the less of the virtue
that is extended through all their parts.
Greater goodness wills to make greater weal;
greater weal is contained by a greater body,
if its parts are equally complete.
Therefore this one that sweeps all
the rest of the universe with it, corresponds
to the circle that loves most and knows most:
so that, if you apply your measure
to the virtue, not to the appearance
of the substances that seem round to you,
you will see a wondrous correspondence
of greater to more and of lesser to less,
in each heaven, to its intelligence.”
As splendid and serene the hemisphere of the air remains, when Boreas blows from that cheek of his where he is gentlest, so that the murk that troubled it before is purged and cleared away, and so the heavens smile with the beauties of its every parish; so did I, after my lady provided me with her clear answer, and like a star in heaven the truth was seen. And after her words had ceased, not otherwise does iron shoot out sparks that is boiling, than did the circles sparkle. Every single spark followed its own fire; and they were so many that their number more than the doubling of the chess squares thousands. I heard Hosanna sung from choir to choir to the fixed Point that holds them to their places, and will hold them always, where they have always been. And she who saw the doubtful thoughts within my mind, said: “The first circles have shown you the Seraphim and the Cherubim. So swiftly do they follow their own bonds, to be as like the Point as they are able; and they are able in so far as they are sublime in vision. Those other loves that go around them, are called the Thrones of the divine aspect, because they terminate the first triad; and you should know that all of them have delight in proportion as their vision penetrates the truth in which every intellect finds its peace. From this you can see how blessedness is founded on the act that sees, not on that which loves, which follows after; and of the seeing, the measure is merit, which grace and good will bring to birth: thus from grade to grade it proceeds. The other triad, that blossoms so in this sempiternal springtime which the nocturnal Ram does not despoil, perpetually 'Hosanna' unwinter with three melodies, which sound in three orders of joy in which it is tri-formed. In that hierarchy are the other godheads: first the Dominions, and then the Virtues; the third order is that of the Powers. Then in the two penultimate dances the Principalities and Archangels circle; the last is all of Angelic sports. These orders all gaze upward, and vanquish downward so, that toward God all are drawn and all do draw.
And Dionysius with so much desire
set himself to contemplate these orders,
that he named and distinguished them as I do.
But Gregory later differed from him;
wherefore, as soon as he opened his eyes
in this heaven, he smiled at himself.
And if a mortal on earth uttered so secret
a truth, I would not have you wonder:
for he who saw it up here revealed it to him
with much else of the truth of these circlings.”
