When both the children of Latona,
covered by the Ram and by the Scales,
make of the horizon a zone together,
for as long as from the point that the zenith holds them in balance
until the one and the other from that girdle,
changing hemisphere, are set free,
for that long, with her face painted with a smile,
Beatrice was silent, gazing
fixedly on the point that had overcome me.
Then she began: “I tell, and do not ask,
that which you wish to hear, because I have seen it
there where every ubi and every quando is centered.
Not to have for Himself a gain of good,
which cannot be, but so that His splendor
might, by shining back, say ‘Subsisto,’
in His eternity, outside of time,
beyond all other comprehension, as it pleased Him,
the eternal Love opened into new loves.
Nor before did He lie as if torpid;
for neither before nor after did proceed
the moving of God over these waters.
Form and matter, conjoined and pure,
came forth into a being that had no flaw,
like three arrows from a three-stringed bow.
And as in glass, in amber, or in crystal
a ray so shines that from its coming
to its being whole there is no interval,
so the threefold effect of its Lord
rayed into its being all at once
without distinction in its beginning.
Co-created were order and structure
for the substances; and those were the summit
of the world in which pure act was produced;
pure potentiality held the lowest part;
in the middle, potentiality with act was bound by
such a tie that it is never untied.
Jerome wrote for you of a long tract
of centuries of the angels being created
before the other world was made;
but this truth is written on many sides
by the writers of the Holy Spirit,
and you will perceive it if you look closely;
and reason also sees it somewhat,
for it would not grant that the movers,
without their perfection, could be for so long.
Now you know where and when these loves
were created and how: so that quenched
in your desire are now three ardors.
Nor would one, in counting, reach twenty
so quickly as a part of the angels
troubled the subject of your elements.
The other part remained, and began this art
that you discern, with so much delight,
that from circling it never departs.
The source of the fall was the accursed
pride of him whom you saw
constrained by all the weights of the world.
Those whom you see here were modest
in recognizing themselves from the goodness
that had made them so quick to understand:
for which their sights were exalted
with illuminating grace and with their merit,
so that they have a firm and full will;
and I want you not to doubt, but be certain,
that to receive grace is meritorious
according to how one’s affection is open.
Now, concerning this consistory,
you can contemplate enough, if my words
are gathered, without other help.
But because on earth in your schools
one reads that the angelic nature
is such, that it understands and remembers and wills,
I will say more, so you may see purely
the truth that down there is confused,
equivocating in such a reading.
These substances, since they were gladdened
by the face of God, have not turned their sight
from it, from which nothing is hidden:
therefore they do not have their vision interrupted
by a new object, and therefore have no need
to remember through a divided concept;
so that down there, not sleeping, one dreams,
believing and not believing they speak the truth;
but in the one is more guilt and more shame.
You do not go down by one path
in your philosophizing: so much does the love of appearance
and its thought transport you!
And even this is borne up here
with less disdain than when the divine Scripture
is put aside or when it is distorted.
You do not think how much blood it costs
to sow it in the world and how much he pleases
who humbly draws near to it.
To make a show, each one contrives and makes
his own inventions; and those are recited
by the preachers, and the Gospel is kept silent.
One says that the moon drew back
during the passion of Christ and interposed itself,
so that the sun’s light did not reach down below;
and he lies, for the light hid itself
of its own accord: that is why to the Spaniards and the Indians
as to the Jews such an eclipse responded.
Florence has not so many Lapis and Bindis
as fables of this sort per year
are shouted from the pulpit here and there:
so that the little sheep, who do not know,
return from the pasture fed on wind,
and not seeing the harm does not excuse them.
Christ did not say to his first assembly:
‘Go, and preach trifles to the world’;
but he gave them a truthful foundation;
and that alone so resounded on their cheeks,
that to fight to enkindle the faith
they made of the Gospel a shield and lance.
Now they go with jests and with buffooneries
to preach, and as long as there is a good laugh,
the cowl puffs up and nothing more is required.
But such a bird nests in the little hood,
that if the common folk could see it, they would see
the pardon in which they trust:
through which so much stupidity has grown on earth,
that, without proof of any testimony,
they would run to every promise.
On this the pig of Saint Anthony fattens,
and many others who are even more pigs,
paying with money without a mint-mark.
But since we have digressed enough, turn back
your eyes now toward the straight path,
so that the way with the time may be shortened.
This nature so far grades itself upward
in number, that there never was a speech
or mortal concept that could go so far;
and if you look at what is revealed
by Daniel, you will see that in his thousands
a determined number is concealed.
The Primal Light, which irradiates it all,
is received within it in as many ways
as are the splendors to which It is joined.
Whence, because to the act that conceives
follows the affection, the sweetness of loving
glows hotly and mildly in it diversely.
See now the height and the breadth
of the eternal Worth, since It has made
so many mirrors for itself, in which It is broken,
remaining one in itself as before.”
