Perhaps six thousand miles away
the sixth hour grows hot for us, and this world
already inclines its shadow almost to the level bed,
when the middle of the sky, deep to us,
begins to become such, that some star
loses its appearance down to this bottom;
and as the brightest handmaiden comes
of the sun further on, so the sky closes
from sight to sight, even to the most beautiful.
Not otherwise the triumph that plays
always around the point that defeated me,
seeming enclosed by that which it encloses,
little by little from my sight was extinguished:
wherefore to turn my eyes to Beatrice
seeing nothing else and love constrained me.
If all that up to now has been said of her
were all contained in a single praise,
it would be little to serve for this occasion.
The beauty that I saw so transcends
not only beyond us, but surely I believe
that only its maker enjoys it all.
By this passage I concede myself defeated
more than ever by a point of his theme
was a comic or tragic poet overcome:
for, like the sun on a face that most trembles,
so the memory of the sweet smile
diminishes my mind from my very self.
From the first day that I saw her face
in this life, up to this sight,
the following in my song has not been cut off;
but now it is fitting that my pursuit desist
further behind her beauty, in my poetizing,
as every artist at his ultimate limit.
Such as it is, I leave to a greater heralding
than that of my trumpet, which brings
its arduous matter to a close,
with the act and voice of a swift leader
she began again: “We have come forth
from the greatest body to the heaven that is pure light:
intellectual light, full of love;
love of true good, full of joy;
joy that transcends all sweetness.
Here you will see the one and the other militia
of paradise, and the one in those aspects
that you will see at the last judgment.”
Like a sudden flash of lightning that scatters
the visual spirits, so that it deprives
the eye of the act of seeing stronger objects,
so a living light shone all around me,
and left me swathed in such a veil
of its splendor, that nothing appeared to me.
“Always the love that pacifies this heaven
welcomes into itself with such a greeting,
to make the candle ready for its flame.”
No sooner had these brief words
come into me, than I understood
myself to be rising above my own power;
and I was rekindled with such new sight
that no light is so pure
that my eyes could not have withstood it;
and I saw a light in the form of a river,
tawny with splendor, between two banks
painted with a miraculous spring.
From this great river came forth living sparks,
and from every side they set themselves in the flowers,
almost like rubies that gold encircles;
then, as if inebriated by the scents,
they plunged themselves again into the wondrous torrent,
and if one entered, another came forth from it.
“The high desire that now inflames and urges you,
to have knowledge of that which you see,
pleases me the more, the more it swells;
but of this water you must first drink
before so great a thirst in you is sated”:
thus said to me the sun of my eyes.
She also added: “The river and the topazes
that enter and exit and the smiling of the grasses
are shadowy prefaces of their truth.
Not that these things are immature in themselves;
but the defect is on your part,
in that you do not yet have sight so exalted.”
There is no infant who so suddenly rushes
with his face toward the milk, if he awakens
much later than his custom,
as I did, to make better mirrors
still of my eyes, bending down to the wave
that flows so that one may be bettered there;
and as soon as the eaves of my eyelids
drank of it, so it seemed to me
that its length had become round.
Then, like people who have been under masks,
who seem other than before, if they cast off
the semblance not their own in which they disappeared,
so into greater festival for me changed
the flowers and the sparks, so that I saw
both courts of heaven made manifest.
O splendor of God, through which I saw
the high triumph of the true kingdom,
give me the power to tell how I saw it!
A light is there above that makes visible
the creator to that creature
who only in seeing him has its peace.
And it extends in a circular figure,
to such a degree that its circumference
would be for the sun too wide a belt.
Its entire appearance is made of a ray
reflected from the summit of the first mobile,
which from there takes its life and power.
And as a hillside in water at its base
is mirrored, as if to see itself adorned,
when it is rich in green and in little flowers,
so, rising above the light all around,
I saw mirrored in more than a thousand tiers
all of our kind who have made their return up there.
And if the lowest rank collects within itself
so great a light, how great is the breadth
of this rose in its outermost leaves!
My sight in the breadth and in the height
was not lost, but took in all
the how much and the what kind of that joy.
Near and far, there, neither adds nor takes away:
for where God without medium governs,
the natural law has no relevance.
Into the yellow of the sempiternal rose,
which slopes down and expands and breathes
an odor of praise to the Sun that is ever vernal,
like one who is silent and wishes to speak,
Beatrice drew me, and said: “Behold
how vast is the convent of the white robes!
See our city, how great its circuit;
see our thrones so filled,
that few people are now awaited here.
And in that great throne on which you hold your eyes
because of the crown that is already placed above it,
before you sup at this wedding feast,
will sit the soul, that on earth will be imperial,
of the high Henry, who to set Italy straight
will come before she is disposed to it.
The blind greed that bewitches you
has made you like the little infant
who dies of hunger and drives away his nurse.
And a prefect in the divine forum will be
then such a one, that openly and in secret
will not walk with him on a single path.
But not long then will he be suffered by God
in the holy office; for he shall be thrust down
there where Simon Magus is for his deserts,
and will make the one from Alagna enter deeper.”
