In form then of a white rose
was shown to me the holy host
that in his blood Christ made his bride;
but the other, that flying sees and sings
the glory of him who enamors it
and the goodness that made it so great,
just like a swarm of bees that enters the flowers
one moment and the next returns
to where its labor takes on flavor,
descended into the great flower that is adorned
with so many leaves, and from there re-ascended
to where its love forever dwells.
Their faces all were of living flame
and their wings of gold, and the rest so white,
that no snow reaches that limit.
When they descended into the flower, from tier to tier
they offered of the peace and of the ardor
that they acquired by fanning their sides.
Nor did the interposing between the high and the flower
of so great a flying multitude
impede the sight and the splendor:
for the divine light is penetrating
through the universe according to what is worthy,
so that nothing can be an obstacle to it.
This secure and joyous kingdom,
populous with people ancient and new,
had its sight and love all on one mark.
O triune light that in a single star
scintillating to their sight, so satisfies them!
look down here upon our storm!
If the barbarians, coming from such a region
that is covered each day by Helice,
rotating with her son of whom she is fond,
seeing Rome and its arduous work,
were struck with amazement, when the Lateran
went above mortal things;
I, who to the divine from the human,
to the eternal from time had come,
and from Florence to a people just and sane,
with what stupor must I have been filled!
Certainly between it and the joy it made me
wish not to hear and to remain mute.
And like a pilgrim who restores himself
in the temple of his vow by gazing,
and hopes already to tell again how it stands,
up through the living light passing,
I led my eyes along the tiers,
now up, now down, and now circling back.
I saw faces made sweet by charity,
with another's light adorned and with their own smile,
and acts adorned with all honesty.
The general form of paradise
my gaze had already taken all in,
not yet fixed intently on any part;
and I was turning with reawakened desire
to ask my lady about things
on which my mind was suspended.
I intended one thing, and another answered me:
I thought to see Beatrice and I saw an elder
clothed with the glorious folk.
Poured out over his eyes and his cheeks
was a benign gladness, in a pious aspect
such as befits a tender father.
And “Where is she?” I said at once.
Whence he: “To bring your desire to its end
Beatrice moved me from my place;
and if you look up into the third circle
from the highest rank, you will see her again
on the throne her merits have allotted her.”
Without answering, I raised my eyes up,
and saw her who was making a crown for herself
by reflecting from herself the eternal rays.
From that region which thunders highest up
no mortal eye is so distant,
whoever plunges deepest into the sea,
as my sight was there from Beatrice;
but it made no difference to me, for her image
did not descend to me through a mixed medium.
“O lady in whom my hope is strong,
and who for my salvation endured
to leave your footprints in Hell,
of all the many things that I have seen,
from your power and from your goodness
I recognize the grace and the virtue.
You have drawn me from a slave to liberty
by all those paths, by all those means
by which you had the power to do so.
Guard your magnificence in me,
so that my soul, which you have made whole,
pleasing to you may be untied from the body.”
So I prayed; and she, as far away
as she appeared, smiled and looked at me;
then she turned back to the eternal fountain.
And the holy elder: “So that you may bring to its summit
perfectly,” he said, “your journey,
for which prayer and holy love have sent me,
fly with your eyes through this garden;
for seeing it will prepare your gaze
the more for mounting through the divine ray.
And the queen of heaven, for whom I burn
entirely with love, will grant us every grace,
because I am her faithful Bernard.”
As is he who perhaps from Croatia
comes to see our Veronica,
who for his long-held hunger is not sated,
but says in his thoughts, as long as it is shown:
‘My Lord Jesus Christ, true God,
was your countenance then made like this?’;
such was I while gazing on the living
charity of him who in this world,
by contemplating, tasted of that peace.
“Son of grace, this joyful existence,”
he began, “will not be known to you,
keeping your eyes only down here at the bottom;
but look at the circles up to the most remote,
until you see the queen enthroned
to whom this kingdom is subject and devout.”
I raised my eyes; and as in the morning
the eastern part of the horizon
surpasses that where the sun declines,
so, as if going from valley to mountain
with my eyes, I saw a part at the summit
conquer in light all the other expanse.
And as there where the pole is awaited
that Phaethon misguided, it grows more inflamed,
and on this side and that the light is made less,
so that peaceful oriflamme
was quickened in the middle, and on every side
in equal measure slackened the flame;
and at that middle point, with outspread wings,
I saw more than a thousand festive angels,
each one distinct in splendor and in art.
I saw there, at their games and at their songs,
a beauty smiling, who was a joy
in the eyes of all the other saints;
and if I had as much richness in speech
as in imagination, I would not dare
to attempt the least of her delight.
Bernard, when he saw my eyes
fixed and intent on her warm love,
turned his own with such affection to her,
that he made mine more ardent in their gazing.
