Devoted to his pleasure, that contemplative one
freely assumed the office of a teacher,
and began these holy words:
«The wound that Mary closed and anointed,
she who is so beautiful at her feet
is she who opened it and who pierced it.
In the order that the third seats make,
Rachel sits beneath her
with Beatrice, just as you see.
Sarah and Rebecca, Judith and she
who was great-grandmother to the singer who, for sorrow
of his sin, said ‘Have mercy on me’,
you can see thus from tier to tier
descending, as I, naming each by name,
go down the rose from petal to petal.
And from the seventh rank down, just as
up to it, Hebrew women follow in succession,
dividing all the tresses of the flower;
because, according to the gaze that faith
had in Christ, these are the wall
at which the sacred stairs are parted.
On this side where the flower is mature
with all of its petals, are seated
those who believed in Christ to come;
on the other side where the semicircles
are broken by empty spaces, are placed
those who had their faces toward Christ who had come.
And as on this side the glorious throne
of the lady of heaven and the other thrones
beneath it make such a partition,
so opposite is that of the great John,
who, always holy, suffered the desert and martyrdom,
and then Hell for two years;
and beneath him thus were allotted to divide
Francis, Benedict, and Augustine,
and others down to here from circle to circle.
Now behold the high divine providence:
for the one and the other aspect of the faith
will equally fill this garden.
And know that from the tier downwards that strikes
midway across the two divisions,
one is seated not for one's own merit,
but for another's, with certain conditions:
for all these are spirits released
before they had true choices.
You can well perceive this by their faces
and also by their childlike voices,
if you look at them well and if you listen.
Now you doubt and, doubting, are silent;
but I will loosen the strong bond
in which your subtle thoughts bind you.
Within the breadth of this realm
no point of chance can have a place,
any more than sadness or thirst or hunger:
for by eternal law is established
all that you see, so that justly
the ring here corresponds to the finger;
and therefore this hasted people
to true life is not without cause
more and less excellent among themselves.
The King for whom this kingdom rests
in so much love and so much delight
that no will dares for more,
creating all minds in His glad sight,
He, at his pleasure, endows with grace
diversely; and here let the effect suffice.
And this is noted expressly and clearly for you
in Holy Scripture in those twins
who in the mother had their wrath stirred.
Therefore, according to the color of the hair,
with such grace the highest light
must worthily be crowned.
Therefore, without merit of their own conduct,
they are placed on different tiers,
differing only in their primal keenness.
It was enough in recent centuries
with innocence, to have salvation,
only the faith of their parents;
after the first ages were complete,
it was needful for males, for their innocent wings,
to acquire virtue through circumcision;
but after the time of grace had come,
without the perfect baptism of Christ,
such innocence was held there below.
Look now upon the face that to Christ
is most like, for its brightness
alone can dispose you to see Christ.”
I saw above her so much joy
rain down, carried by the holy minds
created to fly through that height,
that whatever I had seen before,
did not hold me in such admiration,
nor showed me so much of God’s semblance;
and that love which first descended there,
singing ‘Ave, Maria, gratia plena’,
spread his wings before her.
To the divine canticle replied
from all sides the blessed court,
so that every sight became more serene.
“O holy father, who for my sake endures
to be down here, leaving the sweet place
in which you sit by eternal lot,
who is that angel who with such playfulness
looks into the eyes of our queen,
so in love that he seems to be of fire?”.
Thus I resorted again to the teaching
of him who was beautified by Mary,
as by the sun the morning star.
And he to me: “Boldness and gracefulness
as much as can be in angel and in soul,
is all in him; and we so will it be,
because he is the one who brought the palm
down to Mary, when the Son of God
willed to be burdened with our flesh.
But come now with your eyes as I
will go on speaking, and note the great patricians
of this most just and pious empire.
Those two who sit up there most happy
for being closest to the Empress,
are of this rose almost two roots:
he who on the left is next to her
is the father through whose daring taste
the human species tastes such bitterness;
on the right you see that ancient father
of Holy Church to whom Christ the keys
entrusted of this lovely flower.
And he who saw all the hard times,
before he died, of the beautiful bride
who was won with the lance and with the nails,
sits alongside him, and alongside the other rests
that leader under whom lived on manna
the ungrateful, fickle, and backward people.
Opposite Peter you see Anna sitting,
so content to gaze upon her daughter,
that she does not move an eye to sing hosanna;
and opposite the greatest father of the family
sits Lucia, who moved your lady
when you were bending, to your ruin, your brow.
But because the time flies that makes you sleepy,
here we will make a stop, like a good tailor
who as he has the cloth makes the gown;
and we will direct our eyes to the first love,
so that, looking toward him, you may penetrate
as far as is possible through his effulgence.
Truly, lest perhaps you fall back
moving your wings, thinking to advance,
by praying for grace it is fitting to obtain
grace from her who can help you;
and you will follow me with affection,
so that from my speech your heart does not part.”
And he began this holy orison:
