«Virgin Mother, daughter of your son,
humble and high more than any creature,
fixed term of eternal counsel,
you are she who human nature
so ennobled, that its maker
did not disdain to become its making.
In your womb was rekindled the love,
by whose warmth in the eternal peace
this flower has so been germinated.
Here you are to us a midday torch
of charity, and down below, among mortals,
you are of hope a living fount.
Lady, you are so great and so worthy,
that whoever wants grace and to you does not have recourse,
his desire wants to fly without wings.
Your benignity not only succors
him who asks, but many times
freely anticipates the asking.
In you mercy, in you pity,
in you magnificence, in you is gathered
whatever of goodness is in a creature.
Now this one, who from the lowest pit
of the universe up to here has seen
the spiritual lives one by one,
supplicates you, for grace, for virtue
so much, that he may with his eyes raise himself
higher toward the ultimate salvation.
And I, who for my own seeing never burned
more than I do for his, all my prayers
I offer you, and pray they be not scarce,
so that you every cloud may unbind for him
of his mortality with your prayers,
so that the supreme pleasure may be unfolded to him.
Again I pray you, Queen, who can do
that which you will, that you keep sound,
after so much seeing, his affections.
May your guard conquer human movements:
see Beatrice with how many of the blessed
for my prayers are clasping their hands to you!».
The eyes beloved and venerated by God,
fixed on the orator, showed us
how pleasing to her are devout prayers;
then they turned to the eternal light,
into which one must not believe that there can enter
for a creature an eye so clear.
And I, who to the end of all desires
was approaching, as I had to,
brought to an end the ardor of desire in me.
Bernard was gesturing to me, and smiling,
that I should look upward; but I was
already of myself such as he wished:
for my sight, becoming pure,
was entering more and more through the ray
of the high light that is true in itself.
From that point on my seeing was greater
than our speech shows, which yields to such a sight,
and memory yields to such an excess.
As is he who sees in a dream,
and after the dream the passion impressed
remains, and the rest does not return to the mind,
such am I, for almost all of my vision
ceases, and yet there still distills
in my heart the sweetness that was born from it.
Thus the snow is unsealed by the sun;
thus in the wind on the light leaves
was lost the sentence of the Sibyl.
O highest light that so raise yourself
from mortal concepts, to my mind
lend back a little of how you appeared,
and make my tongue so powerful,
that it may leave but a single spark of your glory
for the people of the future;
for, by returning somewhat to my memory
and by sounding a little in these verses,
more of your victory will be conceived.
I believe, because of the sharpness that I endured
from the living ray, that I would have been lost,
if my eyes had been turned away from it.
And I remember that I was more daring
for this reason to sustain it, so much so that I joined
my gaze with the infinite Goodness.
Oh abundant grace by which I presumed
to fix my gaze through the eternal light,
so much that I consumed my sight in it!
In its depth I saw that it contains within itself,
bound by love in one single volume,
that which is scattered abroad through the universe:
substances and accidents and their relations
as if fused together, in such a way
that what I tell is but a simple light.
The universal form of this knot
I believe I saw, because, in saying this,
I feel that I rejoice more expansively.
A single moment is for me a greater oblivion
than twenty-five centuries to the enterprise
that made Neptune marvel at the shadow of the Argo.
Thus my mind, all suspended,
gazed fixedly, motionless and attentive,
and ever in its gazing grew more ardent.
In that light one so becomes
that to turn from it for another sight
is impossible that one could ever consent;
because the good, which is the object of the will,
is all collected in it, and outside of it,
that which is perfect there is defective.
Henceforth my speech will be more short,
even for what I remember, than that of an infant
who still bathes his tongue at the breast.
Not because more than a single semblance
was in the living light on which I gazed,
which is always such as it was before;
but because of the sight that was growing stronger
in me as I gazed, one single appearance,
as I was changing, was transformed for me.
In the profound and clear subsistence
of the high light there appeared to me three circles
of three colors and of one dimension;
and one from the other, as rainbow from rainbow,
seemed reflected, and the third seemed fire
that from this one and that one is equally breathed.
Oh how short is speech and how faint
to my conception! and this, to what I saw,
is so much that it is not enough to say ‘little.’
O eternal light that only in Yourself reside,
only Yourself understand, and by Yourself understood
and understanding, love and smile upon Yourself!
That circling which, so conceived,
appeared in You as a reflected light,
by my eyes somewhat surveyed,
within itself, of its own very color,
seemed to me painted with our effigy:
for which my face was wholly set on it.
As is the geometer who applies himself entirely
to measure the circle, and does not find,
by thinking, that principle which he needs,
such was I at that new sight:
I wished to see how the image conformed
to the circle, and how it finds its place there;
but my own wings were not for that:
except that my mind was struck
by a flash in which its wish was granted.
To the high fantasy here power failed;
but already my desire and my will were turning,
like a wheel that is evenly moved,
by the Love that moves the sun and the other stars.
